N.Y.

Education Law Section 915-A

Universal free school meals

1.
The department shall require all school districts, charter schools and non-public schools in the state that participate in the national school lunch program or school breakfast program as provided in the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act and the Child Nutrition Act, as amended, to serve breakfast and lunch at no cost to the student. School districts, charter schools and non-public schools shall maximize federal reimbursement for school breakfast and lunch programs by adopting Provision 2, the federal Community Eligibility Provision, or any other provision under such Act, the National School Lunch Act or the National Child Nutrition Act that, in the opinion of the department, maximizes federal funding for meals served in such programs. Provided that school food authorities that do not qualify as a single entity to participate in the community eligibility provision shall be required to group schools within the school food authority, to the extent possible, for purposes of maximizing participation in the community eligibility provision, and provided further that school food authorities shall reapply annually for the community eligibility provision program in the event that doing so would result in a higher percentage of meals being reimbursed at the federal reimbursement rate for a free meal.

2.
Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the contrary, for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school year and each school year thereafter, for each breakfast and lunch meal served, the department shall reimburse the school food authority the difference between (a) the combined state and federal reimbursement rate for a reduced-price or paid meal, respectively, for the current school year and (b) the combined state and federal reimbursement rate for a free meal for the current school year, provided that the total reimbursement rate for each meal served shall equal the combined state and federal reimbursement rate for a free meal for the current school year.

3.
The department, in consultation with the office of temporary and disability assistance, shall promulgate any rule or regulation needed for school districts, charter schools and non-public schools to promote the supplemental nutrition assistance program to a student or person in parental relation to a student by providing either application assistance or a direct referral to an outreach partner identified to the department by the office of temporary and disability assistance to maximize the number of students directly certified for free school meals.

4.
In addition to fulfilling any other applicable state and federal requirements, the department shall provide technical assistance to assist school districts, charter schools, and non-public schools in the transition to universal school meals to ensure successful program operations and to maximize federal funding, including but not limited to the following:

(a)
Assisting school food authorities with one or more schools qualifying for the community eligibility provision in meeting any state and federal requirements necessary in order to maximize reimbursement through the community eligibility provision, including assisting such school food authorities in maximizing participation in the community eligibility provision.

(b)
If a school food authority is ineligible to participate in and receive reimbursement through the community eligibility provision, assisting the school food authority in achieving and maximizing eligibility and, if that is not feasible, assisting the school food authority in determining the viability of using Provision 2 or other special federal provisions available to schools to maximize federal reimbursement.

5.
School districts, charter schools, and non-public schools shall maximize the number of students eligible for free meals by conducting the Direct Certification Matching Process at a minimum of three times per year, designating children as “Other Source Categorically Eligible”, as defined by federal regulations, or, for schools not participating in the Community Eligibility Provision or Provision 2, by annually collecting the free and reduced-price meal application.

Source:
Section 915-A — Universal free school meals, https://www.­nysenate.­gov/legislation/laws/EDN/915-A (updated Jul. 4, 2025; accessed Oct. 3, 2026).

901
School health services to be provided
902
Employment of health professionals
902–A
Treatment of students diagnosed with diabetes by school personnel
902–B
Treatment by licensed school personnel of students diagnosed with allergies
903
Students to furnish health certificates
904
Examinations by health appraisal
905
Record of screening examinations for vision, hearing and scoliosis
906
Existence of communicable diseases
907
Use of sunscreen
908
Prohibition against meal shaming
909
School hygiene districts
910
Choice of method of treatment
911
Enforcement
912
Health and welfare services to all children
912–A
Urine analysis
912–B
Speech and language improvement services
913
Medical examinations of teachers and other employees
914
Immunization of children
915
Prohibiting the sale of certain sweetened foods
915–A
Universal free school meals
916
Pupils with asthma or another respiratory disease requiring rescue inhaler treatment
916–A
Pupils with allergies
916–B
Pupils with diabetes
917
On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator
917–A
On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator in nonpublic schools
918
School district nutrition advisory committees
919
On-site nebulizers
920
Public schools
921
Training of unlicensed school personnel to administer certain medications
921–A
On-site epinephrine device
922
Opioid overdose prevention
923
Sudden cardiac arrest
924
Ingredient and nutritional information requirements
926
Water safety information

Up to date

Verified:

Oct. 3, 2026

Jul. 4, 2025

§ 915-A. Universal free school meals's source at
nysenate​.gov

Link Style

Pragmatic

Pedantic

Blank Outline Levels

×

The legislature occasionally skips outline levels.
For example:

(3) A person may apply [...]
(4)(a) A person petitioning for relief [...]

In this example, (3), (4),
and (4)(a) are all outline levels, but
(4) was
omitted by its authors. It's only implied. This presents an
interesting challenge when laying out the text. We've
decided to display a blank section with this note, in order
to aide readability.

Trust but verify.

Here is the original source for section 915-A

Do you have an opinion about this solution?
Drop us a line.

Close
