December 31, 2025

CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ALL COUNTY LETTER NO. 25-92

The purpose of this All County Letter is to provide County Welfare Departments with
guidance regarding implementation of significant changes to noncitizen eligibility for the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, known as CalFresh in California. House of
Representatives 1, An Act to Provide Reconciliation Pursuant to Title II of H. Con. Res.
14 (Public Law 119-21), signed into law on July 4, 2025, narrowed eligibility for
CalFresh to U.S. citizens, noncitizen U.S. nationals, lawful permanent residents, Cuban-
Haitian entrants, and citizens of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Republic of
Palau, and the Federated States of Micronesia who are in the U.S. under the Compacts
of Free Association.

￼

December 31, 2025

ALL COUNTY LETTER NO. 25-92

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS
ALL CALFRESH PROGRAM SPECIALISTS
ALL CALWORKS PROGRAM SPECIALISTS
ALL COUNTY REFUGEE COORDINATORS
ALL REFUGEE CASH ASSISTANCE CONTACTS
ALL CONSORTIA REPRESENTATIVES
ALL QUALITY CONTROL COORDINATORS

SUBJECT: CALFRESH IMPLEMENTATION OF HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES 1: CHANGES TO NONCITIZEN ELIGIBILITY
POLICY

REFERENCE: FOOD AND NUTRITION ACT OF 2008 SECTION 6(f) (7 U.S.C §
2015(f)); PUBLIC LAW 119-21; 8 U.S.C § 1611, ET SEQ.;
SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (SNAP)
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BIG BEAUTIFUL BILL ACT OF 2025
– ALIEN SNAP ELIGIBILITY; SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (SNAP) PROVISIONS OF THE ONE
BIG BEAUTIFUL BILL – ALIEN SNAP ELIGIBILITY – QUESTION
AND ANSWER #1 REVISED; WELFARE AND INSTITUTIONS
CODE §§ (WIC) 18930, 18930(b)(1), 18930(b)(2); TITLE 45 CODE
OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR) 401.2; 7 CFR
273.2(f)(1)(ii)(B)(3); 7 CFR 273.12(a)(5); 7 CFR 273.12(a)(5)(iii); 7
CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii); 7 CFR 273.2(f)(1)(ii); 7 CFR
273.2(f)(1)(ii)(B)(1); 7 CFR 273.2(f)(10); 7 CFR 273.4(a)(6)(ii) 7
CFR 273.4(a)(6)(i)(D); CALIFORNIA MANUAL OF POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES (MPP) 63-503.442; MPP 63-503.442(b); MPP 63-
503.442(c); All County Letter (ACL) 88-131; ACL 13-32; ACL 14-
56; ACL 14-56E; ACL 21-101; ACL 21-101E; ACL 25-50; ACL 25-
50E; ACL 23-57; and ALL COUNTY INFORMATION NOTICE I-
102-10

This All County Letter (ACL) provides County Welfare Departments (CWDs) with
guidance regarding implementation of significant changes to noncitizen eligibility for the

All County Letter No. 25-92
Page Two

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), known as CalFresh in California,
as a result of House of Representatives 1, An Act to Provide Reconciliation Pursuant to
Title II of H. Con. Res. 14 (H.R. 1) (Public Law (P.L.) 119-21). For additional information
regarding H.R. 1 and its impact to CalFresh, reference ACL 25-50 and ACL 25-50E,
issued July 14, 2025, and August 26, 2025, respectively.

Due to the complexity of the recent changes in federal law and policy, and delays
resulting from the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) only recently issuing complete
guidance (described further below), the guidance set forth in this ACL is effective
April 1, 2026. This date reflects the time required to train county staff and to design and
implement the necessary automation changes within the California Automated Welfare
System (CalSAWS) to ensure consistent and accurate application of the guidance
statewide. It also reflects the extended exclusionary period through April 9, 2026, that
FNS is required to provide pursuant to the district court’s order in New York et al. v.
Rollins et al., No. 6:25-cv-02186-MTK (D. Or.), which is described further below.

The guidance provided in this letter supersedes any previous guidance on issues
addressed within this ACL regarding noncitizen eligibility. This letter does not supersede
or alter guidance on issues not specifically addressed herein.

BACKGROUND

On July 4, 2025, President Trump signed H.R. 1 into law, thereby limiting CalFresh
eligibility to citizens and a narrower group of noncitizens compared to those previously
eligible. On October 31, 2025, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, FNS issued guidance
on this change via a memorandum titled Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) Implementation of the Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 – Alien SNAP Eligibility,
which is attached for reference. The October 31, 2025, guidance is the subject of
litigation New York et al. v. Rollins et al., No. 6:25-cv-02186-MTK (D. Or.) (Filed Nov.
26, 2025) because of inconsistencies, omissions, and related concerns. On December
9, 2025, FNS issued guidance in the form of a question-and-answer document that
conflicts with FNS’ October 31 guidance. On December 10, 2025,
FNS issued a revised version of the question-and-answer document, which is attached
for reference. The revised question-and-answer document conflicts with the October
31st guidance but does not purport to revoke or supersede it. However, on December
15, 2025, the district court issued a preliminary injunction extending the Quality Control
(QC) exclusionary period through April 9, 2026.

Consequently, this letter provides direction based on the California Department of
Social Services’ (CDSS) best understanding of the federal requirements despite the
inconsistencies and errors in the guidance documents issued by FNS since
October 31, 2025. If FNS provides additional clarification that changes any part of the
guidance provided via this letter or if there are impacts from the ongoing litigation,
CDSS will issue updated guidance.

All County Letter No. 25-92
Page Three

OVERVIEW OF CHANGES TO CALFRESH NONCITIZEN ELIGIBILITY

H.R. 1 did not change the definition of “qualified immigrants” or any other provision of
the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of
1996 (8 USC § 1611, et seq.) which at the time resulted in the loss of federal nutrition
benefits for certain noncitizens. Rather, H.R. 1 amended Section 6(f) of the
Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. § 2015(f)) to narrow SNAP eligibility to
individuals who reside in the United States (U.S.) and fall within one of the following
categories:

• Citizens of the United States (U.S.)
This category includes individuals who are:
o U.S. born citizens
o Born a U.S. territory: Guam, Puerto Rico, and U.S. Virgin Islands
o Naturalized
• Noncitizen U.S. Nationals
This category includes individuals who are not citizens of the U.S. but owe
permanent allegiance to the U.S. Nationals can enter the U.S. at any time without
going through immigration procedure. Presently, the term “national” applies to:
o People born in American Samoa and Swain’s Island after December 21,
1952; and
o Residents of the Northern Mariana Islands who choose not to become
U.S. citizens.
• Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs)
This category includes any noncitizen who is living in the U.S. under legally
recognized and lawfully recorded permanent residence as an immigrant. Also
known as “permanent resident alien”, “resident alien permit holder”, and “Green
Card holder”.
• Individuals who reside in the U.S. in accordance with a Compact of Free
Association (COFA) agreement.
This category includes lawfully present citizens of the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau; and
• Cuban and Haitian Entrants (CHEs)
This category includes:
o An individual granted parole as a Cuban-Haitian Entrant (status pending)
or any other special status under the immigration laws for nationals of
Cuba or Haiti (according to 45 CFR 401.2),regardless of the status of the
individual at the time assistance or services are provided;
o A national of Cuba or Haiti who is not subject to a final, non-appealable
and legally enforceable removal order, and:
 Was paroled into the United States and has not acquired any other
status under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA); or
 Is in removal proceedings under the Immigration and Nationality
Act; or

All County Letter No. XX-XX
Page Four

 Has an application for asylum pending with the U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services (USCIS).

Five-Year Waiting Period for Certain LPRs

Certain LPRs are subject to a five-year waiting period before becoming eligible for
CalFresh, unless they are exempt from the waiting period as specified under PRWORA.
The five-year waiting period begins on the date the noncitizen obtains a qualified
noncitizen status.

However, both before and after H.R. 1, there are groups of noncitizens who are exempt
from the five-year waiting period and become immediately eligible for CalFresh after
becoming an LPR. Although some of the following categories of non-LPR noncitizens
are no longer eligible for CalFresh pursuant to H.R. 1, these humanitarian noncitizens
continue to qualify for an exemption from the five-year waiting period, and, if all other
eligibility requirements are met, are immediately eligible for CalFresh if and when they
become LPRs:

• Noncitizens admitted to the U.S. as refugees
• Noncitizens granted asylum
• Noncitizens whose deportations were withheld
• Cuban and Haitian entrants (eligible as CHEs before becoming LPRs)
• COFA Citizens
• Iraqis and Afghans with Special Immigrant Visas (SIV)
• Certain Afghan Nationals Granted Parole Between July 31, 2021, and September
30, 2023
• Certain Ukrainian Nationals Granted Parole Between February 24, 2022, and
September 30, 2024
• Noncitizens admitted to the United States as Amerasian immigrants
• Victims of Trafficking

In addition, LPRs who meet any of the following criteria, continue to qualify for an
exemption from the five-year waiting period, and, if all other eligibility requirements are
met, are immediately eligible for CalFresh:

• Are under 18 years old
• Have 40 qualifying work quarters
• Are blind or disabled
• Were lawfully residing in the U.S. and 65 or older on August 22, 1996
• Have a U.S. military connection
• Are an American Indian born abroad
• Certain Hmong or Highland Laotian tribal members

All County Letter No. 25-92
Page Five

As noted above, H.R. 1 did not amend the rules regarding LPRs and the five-year
waiting period, or any other provisions of PRWORA.

No Longer Eligible for CalFresh

The following categories of lawfully present noncitizens who are not LPRs, are no
longer eligible for CalFresh as a result of H.R. 1:

• Asylees;
• Refugees;
• Parolees (unless they are CHEs);
• Individuals with deportation or removal withheld;
• Conditional entrants;
• Victims of trafficking;
• Battered noncitizens;
• Certain Afghan Nationals granted parole between July 31, 2021, and September
30, 2023; and
• Certain Ukrainian Nationals granted parole between February 24, 2022, and
September 30, 2024.

Lawfully present noncitizens in the categories listed above that are newly ineligible for
CalFresh under H.R. 1 may become eligible for CalFresh or CFAP if they later adjust
their status to LPR and dependent on whether or not they have met the five-year waiting
period or an exemption.

IMPLEMENTATION GUIDANCE

Effective April 1, 2026, CWDs must apply the eligibility criteria outlined above at initial
certification for new applicant households, and at recertification for ongoing households.
This implementation date is necessary because H.R. 1 introduces complex noncitizen
policy changes that require adequate time to provide accurate and comprehensive
policy training to county staff. In addition, CalSAWS must complete the necessary
automation updates to ensure accurate application of the changes. Further, it has been
determined that the use of the current automation or manual workarounds are not
feasible because CalSAWS is not designed to support the changes required under H.R.
1. Relying on manual processes at this scale would create a high risk of inconsistent
data entry, incorrect case actions, and data tracking gaps the system would not be able
to reconcile. These errors could lead to systemic and long-term inaccurate eligibility
outcomes and disruptions in benefits. For these reasons, CDSS directs CWDs not to
use current automation or manual workarounds to implement the changes under H.R. 1
prior to the effective date in this letter.

NEW APPLICATIONS

All County Letter No. 25-92
Page Six

Effective April 1, 2026, at application, CWDs must deny CalFresh eligibility for
household members who do not meet the updated noncitizen eligibility criteria specified
above. When the entire household is ineligible due to ineligible noncitizen status, a
notice of action must be sent to the household informing them that the household was
denied due to ineligible noncitizen status. In cases where some applicant household
members are determined eligible but at least one household member is denied due to
ineligible noncitizen status, a notice of action must be provided to the household
informing them which household members were approved, and which were denied due
to ineligible noncitizen status.

Any application received before April 1, 2026, must be processed under the pre-H.R. 1
criteria and will not be subject to the new noncitizen eligibility restrictions under H.R. 1
until their recertification.

ONGOING HOUSEHOLDS

Effective April 1, 2026, at recertification, CWDs must inquire with the household whether
any noncitizen household members have experienced a change in immigration status
(e.g., adjustment to LPR or other status). CWDs must document the household’s
response, request verification when applicable, and determine whether household
members remain eligible under the H.R. 1 noncitizen eligibility criteria. This applies to
recertifications due in April 2026 with an effective date of May 1, 2026, and onwards.
Consistent with existing program requirements, in all cases immigration status for
noncitizens must be verified through the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements
(SAVE) system. Refer to the SAVE section of this ACL for further guidance.

When a currently aided household member is determined to be ineligible at
recertification due to an ineligible noncitizen status, the CWD must issue a notice of
action informing the ineligible household member of the denial. As with new
applications, when the entire household is ineligible due to ineligible noncitizen status, a
notice of action must be sent to the household informing them that the household was
denied due to ineligible noncitizen status. In addition, if some household members are
determined eligible at recertification but at least one household member is denied, a
notice of action must be provided to the household informing them which household
members were approved, and which were denied due to ineligible noncitizen status.

CHANGES DURING THE CERTIFICATION PERIOD

Households are not required to report a change in immigration status during the
certification period. Voluntary reports of a change in immigration status made by a
household during the certification period that would result in a decrease in the
household’s benefits must result in the issuance of a no-change notice. CWDs must not
request verification and must document the voluntarily reported information, including
any verification submitted voluntarily, in the case record, and follow up at the
household’s next recertification. When a household voluntarily reports a change in

All County Letter No. 25-92
Page Seven

immigration status during the certification period that would result in an increase in the
household’s benefits, the CWD must act on the change.

A SAVE match is considered Verified Upon Receipt (VUR), therefore if a SAVE match is
received during the certification period, the CWD must follow existing policy regarding
mid-period changes as outlined in ACL 21-101 issued October 15, 2021, and
ACL 21-101E issued July 25, 2025.

TREATMENT OF INCOME AND RESOURCES OF EXCLUDED MEMBERS

The CWD must treat an ineligible noncitizen household member as an excluded
household member. The CWD must follow all current rules and regulations regarding
the treatment of excluded household members’ income, resources and deductible
expenses, in accordance with MPP Section 63-503.442.

An ineligible noncitizen household member’s resources must be included in the budget
when calculating the household’s allotment, except households determined eligible
under Categorical Eligibility (CE) or Modified Categorical Eligibility (MCE) rules. Refer to
ACL 13-32 issued April 24, 2013 , ACL 14-56 issued August 22, 2014, and ACL 14-56E,
issued April 10, 2015, for more information on CE and MCE. In addition, a pro rata
share of an ineligible household member’s income must be included in the budget when
determining the household’s allotment. The ineligible household member’s allowable
deductible expenses must also be prorated.

SYSTEMATIC ALIEN VERIFICATION FOR ENTITLEMENTS (SAVE)

In accordance with 7 CFR 273.2(f)(1)(ii) and 7 CFR 273.2(f)(10), CWDs must verify a
noncitizen’s immigration status at both initial application and recertification through
SAVE to determine CalFresh eligibility. Note, per 7 CFR 273.2(f)(1)(ii)(B)(1), if the CWD
submits a SAVE request to USCIS for verification and verification is pending, the CWD
cannot delay, deny, reduce or terminate the individual's eligibility for benefits on the
basis of the individual's immigration status.

A SAVE match is considered VUR and it must be acted on accordingly during initial
application, recertification, and during the certification period. However, if a household
disagrees with a SAVE verification result which results in a denial or discontinuance of
their benefits, the CWD must request any additional information needed to complete the
secondary SAVE via USCIS Form G-845 by sending the household a CW 2200, if
applicable, and must certify the household pending the results of the secondary SAVE
for up to six months from the date of the original request for verification (ACL 88-131;
7 CFR 273.2(f)(1)(ii)(B)(3)). Once the CWD receives the secondary SAVE verification
results, the CWD must follow existing policy regarding mid-period changes and, based
on the SAVE verification results, either continue benefits or provide the household with
a timely notice of action to terminate benefits. Refer to ACIN I-102-10, issued December
29, 2010, and ACL 23-57, issued June 29, 2023, for more information on SAVE.

All County Letter No. 25-92
Page Eight

CALIFORNIA FOOD ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (CFAP)

Currently, CFAP is operated pursuant to a federal option that limits eligibility to lawfully
present noncitizens in immigration status categories that lost eligibility for CalFresh
under PRWORA (7 USC § 2016(i)). As such, Welfare and Institutions Code (WIC)
Section 18930(b)(1), provides that lawfully present noncitizens qualify for state-funded
food benefits through CFAP if they are ineligible for CalFresh solely as a result of
PRWORA.

H.R. 1 does not impact CFAP noncitizen eligibility criteria pursuant to this federal option,
and state law governing CFAP eligibility remains unchanged. Thus, most lawfully
present noncitizens who lose CalFresh eligibility due to H.R. 1 are not eligible for CFAP,
with the exception of battered noncitizens per WIC Section 18930(b)(2). However,
lawfully present noncitizens who lose CalFresh eligibility due to H.R. 1 may qualify for
CFAP if they later adjust their status to a CFAP qualifying status.

QUALITY CONTROL

FNS’s guidance states that the QC 120-day exclusionary period outlined at
7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii), often referred to as a “QC hold harmless period”, ended on
November 1, 2025, 120 days after the law was enacted on July 4, 2025. However, as
previously described in the background section of this letter, a preliminary injunction has
been issued extending the QC exclusionary period through April 9, 2026. CDSS plans
to issue updated policy guidance in 2026 as the end of the exclusionary period
approaches.

If you have any questions or need additional guidance regarding the information in this
letter, contact the CalFresh Policy Bureau at CalFreshPolicy@dss.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Original Document Signed By

ALEXIS FERNÁNDEZ GARCIA
Deputy Director
Family Engagement and Empowerment Division

Attachments

DATE: October 31, 2025

SUBJECT: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Implementation of the One
Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 – Alien SNAP Eligibility

TO: All SNAP State Agencies
All Regions

On July 4, 2025, President Donald J. Trump signed into law Public Law 119-21, the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 (OBBB). On September 4, 2025, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
published a memorandum describing the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
provisions of the OBBB, titled “Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Provisions of the
One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 – Information Memorandum.”

This memorandum provides State agencies with additional information on implementing
Section 10108 of the OBBB, which makes changes to alien eligibility for SNAP.

SNAP Alien Eligibility

Section 10108 of the OBBB amends section 6(f) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (FNA),
limiting eligibility for SNAP to the following groups: U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, lawful
permanent residents (LPRs), Cuban and Haitian entrants1, and Compact of Free Association
(COFA) citizens.

Prior to the OBBB, certain lawfully present aliens, as defined by the Personal Responsibility
and Work Opportunity Act (PRWORA)2 were eligible to receive SNAP benefits, provided they
met all other SNAP eligibility requirements and completed a 5-year waiting period, unless
exempted by PRWORA.

1
Cuban and Haitian entrants as defined in section 501(e) of the Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980, 8 U.S.C. Sec 1522 note.
2
Aliens who were qualified aliens as defined by section 431 of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA) (8 USC 1641) and aliens included in section 402(a) of PRWORA (8 USC 1612(a)) in addition to groups listed in section 6(f) of the FNA
were eligible for SNAP.

Food and Nutrition Service, Braddock Metro Center, 1320 Braddock Place, Alexandria, VA 22314

USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.

Page 2 of 11

Following the OBBB, some alien groups previously eligible for SNAP are no longer eligible.
Aliens continue to be subject to a 5-year waiting period, unless exempted by PRWORA.3 The
chart below summarizes eligibility for aliens pursuant to the OBBB amendments to section
6(f) of the FNA.

Eligible Alien Groups Under the OBBB Eligibility Timing

• Non-citizen U.S. nationals Eligible immediately, with no waiting
• Cuban and Haitian entrants period, as long as they meet all other SNAP
• Compacts of Free Association (COFA) financial and non-financial eligibility
citizens requirements.

• Lawful permanent residents (LPR) Eligible after a 5-year waiting period, as long
(also known as Green Card holders) as they meet all other SNAP financial and
non-financial eligibility requirements.

LPRs may still be eligible for SNAP without a
waiting period if they meet one or more of
the following conditions:
• Are under 18 years old
• Have 40 qualifying work quarters
• Are blind or disabled
• Were lawfully residing in the U.S. and
65 or older on August 22, 1996
• Have a U.S. military connection
• Are admitted to the United States as
an Amerasian immigrant
• Are an American Indian born abroad
• Certain Hmong or Highland Laotian
tribal members

The chart in Attachment 1 illustrates changes to SNAP alien eligibility.

3
See 8 USC 1612.

Page 3 of 11

Implementation

Section 10108 of the OBBB was effective upon enactment, July 4, 2025. State agencies must
immediately apply the new eligibility criteria to new applicants at initial certification. For
households already receiving SNAP, State agencies must review household circumstances
and apply these policies at recertification. If an alien does not fall into one of the groups listed
in section 6(f) of the FNA, as amended by OBBB, the alien is no longer eligible for SNAP and
must be removed from the household at that time.4

Changes During the Certification Period

The Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 requires State agencies to use the Systematic Alien
Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) program to verify the immigration status of all aliens
participating in SNAP prior to certification. FNS strongly encourages States to check SAVE
whenever required changes or recertifications actions are made. Through these updates, State
agencies may obtain information during a household’s certification period that indicates an
alien is no longer in a SNAP-eligible immigration status or designation. State agencies must
review household circumstances to take appropriate action when this occurs and follow
program rules for acting on changes and resolving unclear information at 7 CFR 273.12(c).

Quality Control and Technical Assistance

FNS will, as appropriate, hold States harmless for Quality Control (QC) purposes for 120 days
from the required implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii).

The 120-day variance exclusion period will not apply if the State agency does not implement
the new provision in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii)(D). State agencies that
implement a provision later than the required implementation date, but before the end date

4
Pursuant to USDA regulations at 7 CFR 273.12(a)(1), 7 CFR 273.12(d), and 7 CFR 273.18, households are not liable for a claim due to a change
in circumstances the household is not required to report. Since households are not required to report a change in immigration status, aliens
who lose SNAP eligibility at recertification due to the OBBB SNAP eligibility changes, are not subject to a claim for over issuance for the
benefits received after the OBBB changes took effect.

Page 4 of 11

of the exclusionary period, will only be allowed a variance exclusion for the time remaining.
State agencies that implement after the exclusionary period end date do not get a variance
exclusion. Early implementation rules at 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii)(A) do not apply since the
enactment date for Section 10108 of OBBB was July 4, 2025.

A 120-day variance exclusion is permitted for the misapplication of changes in Section 10108
of the OBBB to new and ongoing SNAP households until the exclusionary period end date on
November 1, 2025.

FNS stands ready to work with State agencies and provide additional technical assistance as
OBBB implementation continues. State agencies with questions on Section 10108 of the
OBBB should contact their respective FNS Regional Office. These questions will help inform
additional guidance in future memos.

Sincerely,

SASHA Digitally signed by SASHA
GERSTEN-PAAL
GERSTEN- Date: 2025.10.31 10:20:47
PAAL -04'00'

for Ronald Ward
Acting Associate Administrator
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Food and Nutrition Service

Attachments

Attachment 1

SNAP Alien Eligibility Pre- and Post- One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBB)

This chart compares SNAP eligibility for alien groups before and after the OBBB became law. The chart in Attachment 2 provides a
description of alien groups. Per 7 CFR 273.4(a)(6)(iv), each category of eligible alien status stands alone for purposes of
determining eligibility. If eligibility expires under one eligible alien status, the State agency must determine if eligibility exists
under another status.

Alien Group Pre-OBBB Eligibility Post-OBBB Eligibility

Non-Citizen U.S. Nationals Eligible immediately Eligible immediately

Lawful Permanent Residents (LPR) Eligible after a 5-year waiting period, as Eligible after a 5-year waiting period, as
long as they meet all other SNAP financial long as they meet all other SNAP financial
and non-financial eligibility requirements. and non-financial eligibility requirements.

LPRs may still be eligible for SNAP without LPRs may still be eligible for SNAP without
a waiting period if they meet one or more a waiting period if they meet one or more
of the following conditions: of the following conditions:
• Are under 18 years old • Are under 18 years old
• Have 40 qualifying work quarters • Have 40 qualifying work quarters
• Are blind or disabled • Are blind or disabled
• Were lawfully residing in the U.S. • Were lawfully residing in the U.S.
and 65 or older on August 22, 1996 and 65 or older on August 22, 1996
• Have a U.S. military connection • Have a U.S. military connection

Food and Nutrition Service, Braddock Metro Center, 1320 Braddock Place, Alexandria, VA 22314

USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.

Page 6 of 11

Alien Group Pre-OBBB Eligibility Post-OBBB Eligibility
• Are admitted to the United States
as an Amerasian immigrant
• Are certain American Indians born
abroad
• Are certain Hmong or Highland
Laotian tribal members

Cuban and Haitian Entrants (CHE) Eligible immediately Eligible immediately

Compacts of Free Association Eligible immediately Eligible immediately
(COFA) Citizens

Children Under Age 18 in any SNAP- Eligible immediately Eligible immediately
eligible Alien Group5

LPRs with 40 Qualifying Work Eligible immediately Eligible immediately
Quarters

Individuals in any SNAP-eligible Eligible immediately Eligible immediately
Alien Group3 Who is Blind or
Disabled

Individuals in any SNAP-eligible Eligible immediately Eligible immediately
Alien Group3 Lawfully Residing in

5
Note that “SNAP-eligible alien groups” are different pre- and post-OBBB. Post-OBBB SNAP eligible alien groups are U.S. nationals, lawful permanent residents (LPRs), Cuban and Haitian entrants
(CHEs), and Compacts of Free Association (COFA) citizens.

Page 7 of 11

Alien Group Pre-OBBB Eligibility Post-OBBB Eligibility
the U.S. and Was 65 or Older on
August 22, 1996

Individuals in any SNAP-eligible Eligible immediately Eligible immediately
Alien Group3 Who Has a Military
Connection

Deportation Withheld Eligible immediately Not eligible

Amerasians Eligible immediately Eligible immediately

Certain American Indians Born Eligible immediately Not eligible unless an LPR, then eligible
Abroad immediately

Hmong or Highland Laotian Tribal Eligible immediately Not eligible unless an LPR, then eligible
Members immediately

Iraqi and Afghan Special Eligible immediately See “Post-OBBB Eligibility” for LPR.
Immigrants (SIV)

Conditional Entrants Eligible immediately Not eligible unless an LPR. See “Post-
OBBB Eligibility” for LPR

Battered Aliens Eligible immediately Not eligible unless an LPR. See “Post-
OBBB Eligibility” for LPR

Victims of Severe Trafficking and Eligible immediately Not eligible unless an LPR. See “Post-
Certain Family Members OBBB Eligibility” for LPR

Refugees Eligible immediately Not eligible

Page 8 of 11

Alien Group Pre-OBBB Eligibility Post-OBBB Eligibility

Individuals Granted Asylum Eligible immediately Not eligible

Parolees Eligible after a 5-year waiting period Not eligible

Certain Afghan Nationals Granted Eligible immediately Not eligible
Parole Between July 31, 2021, and
September 30, 2023

Certain Ukrainian Nationals Eligible immediately Not eligible
Granted Parole Between February
24, 2022, and September 30, 2024

LPR Pursuant to Section 249 of the Eligible after a 5-year waiting period See “Post-OBBB Eligibility” for LPR
INA6 (8 USC 1259)7

Alien groups in the above chart who are eligible immediately are exempt from meeting the 5-year waiting period outlined in
PRWORA. Individuals must meet all other SNAP eligibility requirements, such as income and resource limits.

6
Immigration and Nationality Act.
7
Status acquired after any type of entry into the U.S. prior to January 1, 1972, and maintained continuous residence in the U.S. since entry. See USCIS policy manual for more information.

Page 9 of 11

Attachment 2

Alien Group Descriptions

This table provides a detailed description of some of the alien groups who were either previously eligible for or are currently
eligible for SNAP.

Alien Group Description

Battered aliens Under certain circumstances, a battered alien spouse or child,
an alien parent of a battered child, or an alien child of a
battered parent with a petition pending.

Certain American Indians born abroad American Indians born in Canada living in the United States
(U.S.) under §289 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA)
or alien members of a federally recognized Indian tribe under
§4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act.

Compacts of Free Association (COFA) citizens of the Federated Individuals who lawfully reside in the U.S. in accordance with
States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and section 141 of the Compacts of Free Association between the
the Republic of Palau Government of the United States and the Governments of the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, and the Republic of Palau.

Conditional entrants Granted conditional entry under §203(a)(7) of the INA as in
effect before 04/01/80.

Cuban or Haitian entrants Cuban or Haitian entrant under §501(e) of the Refugee
Education Assistance Act of 1980.

Page 10 of 11

Alien Group Description

Deportation (or removal) withheld Deportation is being withheld under §243(h) of the INA as in
effect before 04/01/97, or removal is withheld under §241(b)(3)
of the INA.

Hmong or Highland Laotian tribal members An individual lawfully residing in the U.S. who was a member
of a Hmong or Highland Laotian tribe that rendered assistance
to U.S. personnel by taking part in a military or rescue
operation during the Vietnam era (Aug. 5, 1964 – May 7, 1975).
This category includes the spouse (or un-remarried surviving
spouse) or unmarried dependent children of these individuals.

Individuals granted asylum Granted asylum under §208(b) of the INA.

Iraqi and Afghan special immigrants (SIV) Special immigrant status under §101(a)(27) of the INA may be
granted to Iraqi and Afghan nationals who have worked on
behalf of the U.S. government in Iraq or Afghanistan. The
Department of Defense Appropriations Act of 2010, PL 111-
118, § 8120 enacted on Dec. 19, 2009, provides that SIVs are
eligible for all benefits to the same extent and the same time
period as refugees.

Lawful Permanent Resident (LPR) LPRs, also known as “Green Card” holders, are aliens who are
lawfully authorized to live permanently in the United States.
This category also includes “Amerasian immigrants” as
defined under §584 of the Foreign Operations, Export
Financing and Related Programs Appropriations Act of 1988.

Military connection An individual who is lawfully residing in a State and is on
active duty in the military (excluding National Guard) or is an

Page 11 of 11

Alien Group Description
honorably discharged veteran whose discharge is not because
of immigration status (includes spouse, surviving spouse if not
married, and unmarried dependent children). A discharge
“Under Honorable Conditions”, which is not the same as an
honorable discharge, does not meet this requirement.

Parolees Paroled into the U.S. under §212(d)(5) of the INA for a period of
at least 1 year.

Refugees Refugees admitted to the U.S. under §207 of the INA.

Victims of a severe form of trafficking in persons and certain Victims under the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000
family members and family members granted derivative T nonimmigrant
status.

DATE: December 9, 2025

SUBJECT: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Provisions of the One Big
Beautiful Bill – Alien SNAP Eligibility – Question and Answer #1

TO: All SNAP State Agencies
All Regions

On July 4, 2025, President Donald J. Trump signed into law the One Big Beautiful Bill
legislation (OBBB). The OBBB makes significant changes to the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP), including changes to alien eligibility for SNAP.

On October 31, 2025, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) published a memorandum with
information on Section 10108 of the OBBB, which makes changes to alien eligibility for SNAP.

This question-and-answer set provides additional information on Section 10108 of the OBBB.

FNS stands ready to work with State agencies and provide additional technical assistance.
State agencies with questions on Section 10108 of the OBBB should contact their respective
FNS Regional Office.

Sincerely,

Patrick A. Penn
Deputy Under Secretary
Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
U.S. Department of Agriculture

Attachments

Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9600
USDA is an Equal Opportunity Provider, Employer, and Lender

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Provisions of the
One Big Beautiful Bill (OBBB)
Alien Eligibility
Question and Answer #1

A. General

1. Are the OBBB changes to alien eligibility effective immediately or upon
rulemaking?

The changes were effective upon the enactment of OBBB—July 4, 2025. OBBB
specifies which alien groups are eligible for SNAP under section 6(f) of the Food and
Nutrition Act of 2008 (FNA) and is not contingent on regulations before the changes go
into effect.

2. Are individuals who have been granted asylum or who are refugees eligible for
SNAP?

No. Individuals who have been granted asylum or who are refugees, including
individuals under 18 years of age, are not eligible for SNAP by virtue of that status.

With the passage of OBBB, the only aliens eligible for SNAP are those with the
following statuses: lawful permanent resident (LPR), Cuban and Haitian entrant (CHE),
or Compacts of Free Association (COFA) citizen. See chart below for additional
information on asylees or refugees who have adjusted status to LPR.

B. 5-year Waiting Period

3. Does the 5-year waiting period still apply following the OBBB?

Yes. OBBB did not make changes to the 5-year waiting period requirement and
exceptions, which are established by the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA), 8 USC 1613.

Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9600
USDA is an Equal Opportunity Provider, Employer, and Lender

Page 3 of 5

4. When does the 5-year waiting period begin?

The 5-year waiting period begins on the date the alien obtains status as a qualified
alien or enters the U.S. in a qualifying status under 8 USC 1613. 1

5. Post-OBBB, will individuals who adjust from a status not eligible for SNAP under
Section 6(f) of the FNA to lawful permanent resident (LPR) status now need to
wait 5 years after adjusting to LPR status to receive SNAP?

Not necessarily. Per current policy, aliens who adjust status to LPR from one of the
groups exempt from the 5-year waiting period in section 403 of PRWORA (8 USC 1613),
are not required to wait for 5 years after becoming an LPR. 2

The chart below shows alien groups and whether they are subject to the 5-year
waiting period after adjusting their status to LPR.

Alien Group Pre-LPR-Adjustment Subject to 5-year Waiting
Period After Adjusted
Status to LPR 3

Refugees No

Individuals Granted Asylum No

Deportation Withheld No

1
These groups include lawful permanent residents, asylees, refugees, parolees, individuals granted withholding of deportation or removal,
conditional entrants, Cuban or Haitian entrants, battered aliens, and alien victims of a severe form of trafficking, Certain American Indians
born abroad and Hmong or Highland Laotian tribal members.

2
Refugee, individuals granted asylum, deportation withheld, Cuban and Haitian entrant, Amerasian, individual in a SNAP-eligible alien
group with a military connection, individual in a SNAP-eligible alien group who is under age 18, American Indian born abroad, and Hmong or
Highland Laotian tribal member.

3
An individual has “adjusted status to LPR” when they have received an approval notice and Permanent Resident Card (Green Card) from
the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). An individual is not considered an LPR if they have applied to adjust status
and have not yet received a decision.

Page 4 of 5

Alien Group Pre-LPR-Adjustment Subject to 5-year Waiting
Period After Adjusted
Status to LPR 3

Cuban and Haitian Entrants (CHE) No

Amerasians No

Compacts of Free Association (COFA) Citizens No

American Indians Born Abroad No

Hmong or Highland Laotian Tribal Members No

Iraqi and Afghan Special Immigrants (SIV) No

Certain Afghan Nationals Granted Parole Between No
July 31, 2021, and September 30, 2023

Certain Ukrainian Nationals Granted Parole No
Between February 24, 2022, and September 30,
2024

Conditional Entrants Yes

Battered Aliens Yes

Victims of Severe Trafficking Yes

Individuals Granted Parole for a Period of at Least Yes
One Year

Provided other SNAP eligibility requirements are met, someone in one of the above
“Yes” groups is not subject to the 5-year waiting period if the person:

• Is under 18 years old;
• Has 40 qualifying work quarters;

Page 5 of 5

• Is blind or disabled;
• Was lawfully residing in the U.S. and 65 or older on August 22, 1996; or
• Has a U.S. military connection.

C. Verification

6. How can a State agency verify how long an alien has been in a qualified status?

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) documents generally
contain the date an alien entered the country or adjusted to the immigration status
reflected on the document. If an alien does not have USCIS documentation, the State
agency can verify the date of entry into the United States or date status was given by
submitting a request for additional verification through the Systematic Alien
Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) program. State agencies with questions about
SAVE should contact SAVE.help@uscis.dhs.gov.

DATE: December 9, 2025

SUBJECT: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Provisions of the One Big
Beautiful Bill – Alien SNAP Eligibility – Question and Answer #1 REVISED

TO: All SNAP State Agencies
All Regions

On July 4, 2025, President Donald J. Trump signed into law the One Big Beautiful Bill
legislation (OBBB). The OBBB makes significant changes to the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP), including changes to alien eligibility for SNAP.

On October 31, 2025, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) published a memorandum with
information on Section 10108 of the OBBB, which makes changes to alien eligibility for SNAP.

This question-and-answer set provides additional information on Section 10108 of the OBBB.
FNS revised Question 5 due to a typo.

FNS stands ready to work with State agencies and provide additional technical assistance.
State agencies with questions on Section 10108 of the OBBB should contact their respective
FNS Regional Office. These questions will help inform additional guidance in future memos.

Sincerely,

Patrick A. Penn
Deputy Under Secretary
Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
U.S. Department of Agriculture

Attachments

Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9600
USDA is an Equal Opportunity Provider, Employer, and Lender

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Provisions of the
One Big Beautiful Bill (OBBB)
Alien Eligibility
Question and Answer #1

A. General

1. Are the OBBB changes to alien eligibility effective immediately or upon
rulemaking?

The changes were effective upon the enactment of OBBB—July 4, 2025. OBBB
specifies which alien groups are eligible for SNAP under section 6(f) of the Food and
Nutrition Act of 2008 (FNA) and is not contingent on regulations before the changes go
into effect.

2. Are individuals who have been granted asylum or who are refugees eligible for
SNAP?

No. Individuals who have been granted asylum or who are refugees, including
individuals under 18 years of age, are not eligible for SNAP by virtue of that status.

With the passage of OBBB, the only aliens eligible for SNAP are those with the
following statuses: lawful permanent resident (LPR), Cuban and Haitian entrant (CHE),
or Compacts of Free Association (COFA) citizen. See chart below for additional
information on asylees or refugees who have adjusted status to LPR.

B. 5-year Waiting Period

3. Does the 5-year waiting period still apply following the OBBB?

Yes. OBBB did not make changes to the 5-year waiting period requirement and
exceptions, which are established by the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA), 8 USC 1613.

Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9600
USDA is an Equal Opportunity Provider, Employer, and Lender

Page 3 of 5

4. When does the 5-year waiting period begin?

The 5-year waiting period begins on the date the alien obtains status as a qualified
alien or enters the U.S. in a qualifying status under 8 USC 1613. 1

5. Post-OBBB, will individuals who adjust from a status not eligible for SNAP under
Section 6(f) of the FNA to lawful permanent resident (LPR) status now need to
wait 5 years after adjusting to LPR status to receive SNAP?

Not necessarily. Per current policy, aliens who adjust status to LPR from one of the
groups exempt from the 5-year waiting period in section 403 of PRWORA (8 USC 1613),
are not required to wait for 5 years after becoming an LPR. 2

The chart below shows alien groups and whether they are subject to the 5-year
waiting period after adjusting their status to LPR.

Alien Group Pre-LPR-Adjustment Subject to 5-year Waiting
Period After Adjusted
Status to LPR 3

Refugees No

Individuals Granted Asylum No

Deportation Withheld No

1
These groups include lawful permanent residents, asylees, refugees, parolees, individuals granted withholding of deportation or removal,
conditional entrants, Cuban or Haitian entrants, battered aliens, and alien victims of a severe form of trafficking, Certain American Indians
born abroad and Hmong or Highland Laotian tribal members.

2
Refugee, individuals granted asylum, deportation withheld, Cuban and Haitian entrant, Amerasian, individual in a SNAP-eligible alien
group with a military connection, individual in a SNAP-eligible alien group who is under age 18, American Indian born abroad, and Hmong or
Highland Laotian tribal member.

3
An individual has “adjusted status to LPR” when they have received an approval notice and Permanent Resident Card (Green Card) from
the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). An individual is not considered an LPR if they have applied to adjust status
and have not yet received a decision.

Page 4 of 5

Alien Group Pre-LPR-Adjustment Subject to 5-year Waiting
Period After Adjusted
Status to LPR 3

Cuban and Haitian Entrants (CHE) No

Amerasians No

Compacts of Free Association (COFA) Citizens No

American Indians Born Abroad No

Hmong or Highland Laotian Tribal Members No

Iraqi and Afghan Special Immigrants (SIV) No

Certain Afghan Nationals Granted Parole Between No
July 31, 2021, and September 30, 2023

Certain Ukrainian Nationals Granted Parole No
Between February 24, 2022, and September 30,
2024

Victims of Severe Trafficking No

Conditional Entrants Yes

Battered Aliens Yes

Individuals Granted Parole for a Period of at Least Yes
One Year

Provided other SNAP eligibility requirements are met, someone in one of the above
“Yes” groups is not subject to the 5-year waiting period if the person:

• Is under 18 years old;
• Has 40 qualifying work quarters;

Page 5 of 5

• Is blind or disabled;
• Was lawfully residing in the U.S. and 65 or older on August 22, 1996; or
• Has a U.S. military connection.

C. Verification

6. How can a State agency verify how long an alien has been in a qualified status?

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) documents generally
contain the date an alien entered the country or adjusted to the immigration status
reflected on the document. If an alien does not have USCIS documentation, the State
agency can verify the date of entry into the United States or date status was given by
submitting a request for additional verification through the Systematic Alien
Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) program. State agencies with questions about
SAVE should contact SAVE.help@uscis.dhs.gov.
