DATE: October 19, 2025

Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter No.: I 25-24

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS
ALL COUNTY ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
ALL COUNTY MEDI-CAL PROGRAM SPECIALISTS/LIAISONS

SUBJECT: Updates to the Single Streamlined Application

The purpose of this Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter (MEDIL) is to
inform counties about the recent changes to the online Single Streamlined Application
(SSApp), which individuals use to apply for insurance affordability programs through
CoveredCA.com, and to provide information about the release of the updated paper
SSApp. The online portal changes were implemented in the California Healthcare
Eligibility, Enrollment, and Retention System (CalHEERS) Release 25.9 on September
22, 2025.

Overview

The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), in partnership with Covered
California and other stakeholders, collaborated with MAXIMUS and The Creative
Agency (formerly The Center for Health Literacy) to update the paper SSApp. DHCS
also worked with the County Welfare Directors Association, Statewide Automated
Welfare System, CalHEERS, and Deloitte’s Human-Centered Design consultants, to
redesign the online SSApp to improve the user experience when applying for health
care coverage.

DHCS and Covered California first introduced the paper Single Streamlined Application
(SSApp) in 2013. The updated version includes several changes to improve usability:

• A table of contents is now featured on the front cover of the booklet.
• A separate table of contents has been added to organize the application sections
more clearly.
• A redesigned layout that allows applicants to respond for up to four household
members per question using four columns per page. This enables applicants to
read each question once and provide responses for multiple individuals
efficiently.

California Department of Health Care Services State of California
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Gavin Newsom, Governor
1501 Capitol Avenue | Sacramento, CA | 95899-7413
MS 4607 | Phone (916) 552-9200 | www.dhcs.ca.gov California Health and Human Services Agency

Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter No.: I 25-24
Page 2
October 19, 2025

Summary of Updates

The updates to both the online and paper versions of the SSApp reflect recent federal
and state guidance. These updates include improvements to the flow and wording of
questions, as well as revisions to the Rights and Responsibilities section for applicants.
The changes include:

Clearer instructions on who to include:
o Updated guidance informs the applicant to include certain people on
the application, even if they do not want to apply for health coverage.

Streamlined application flow:
o People who are not applying for coverage will skip questions about
enrollment in Medicare or eligibility for free Part A Medicare.

Clarified exceptions:

o For applicants who do not have a Social Security number (SSN),
additional clarity has been added to the option to indicate that they do not
qualify for an SSN or are only eligible for an SSN for a valid non-work
reason.
New questions:

o For applicants who attest to naturalized or derived citizen status, there is a
new prompt to provide an alien number.
o A new question allows applicants to indicate if they are experiencing
homelessness.

Summary of Updates to the Applicant Rights and Responsibilities

Cooperation with Medical Support:

o Language added to inform applicants they must cooperate with the state
or county to get any health coverage that they or their family may be
entitled to through an absent parent unless they are pregnant or have

Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter No.: I 25-24
Page 3
October 19, 2025

good cause to not cooperate. If they need more information about good
cause they must contact their county office.

Consent from Veterans:

o Language added to inform applicants eligible for veterans’ benefits that by
submitting the application they are providing 12-month consent for the
Medi-Cal program (DHCS) to transmit their name, email address, mailing
address, and mobile phone number to the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The information will be used only for the purpose of receiving additional
information about veterans' benefits for which they may be eligible.
Estate Recovery Requirements:

o Language updated for the Medi-Cal Program Estate Recovery program for
clarity and accuracy.

Express Consent to Contact:

o Language added to inform applicants that by providing contact information
on this application, applicants give the DHCS, Covered California, health
plans and their business associates, local county offices, and other
entities that oversee Medi-Cal benefits express consent to contact them
by phone or text message. This is in accordance with the Telephone
Consumer Protection Act (TCPA) and Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) guidelines for Express Consent.

Additional details about changes to the online SSApp changes that were implemented
in the CalHEERS 25.9 release is available in the CalHEERS 25.9 release notes.

Next steps in the paper SSApp Development

DHCS is in the final stages of developing the English and Spanish versions of the paper
SSApp. In late 2025 the English SSApp will be available for counties and community
partners to order, and a PDF version will be published on the DHCS website. The
Spanish SSApp and a PDF version will follow in late 2025 or early 2026. In the
meantime, counties should continue using the paper SSApp available in their inventory.

Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter No.: I 25-24
Page 4
October 19, 2025

In the coming months, DHCS will issue two Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Informational
Letters (MEDILs) on the availability of the SSApp. The first will provide updates about
the release of the SSApp and ordering information for the paper English and Spanish
SSApp.

DHCS will issue a second MEDIL in 2026 once the remaining 17 threshold languages'
PDF versions of the SSApp are available on the DHCS website. Counties must continue
to accept the 2013 paper or PDF versions of the SSApp, even after the updated
versions are released.

If you have any questions, or if we can provide further information, please send them to
MCED-Policy@dhcs.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Sarah Crow, Chief
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division

Enclosure (If applicable)
