WGIUPD GENERAL INFORMATION SYSTEM 12/26/07
DIVISION: Office of Health Insurance Programs PAGE 1
GIS 07 MA/027

TO: Local District Commissioners, Medicaid Directors, Third Party
Supervisors

FROM: Judith Arnold, Director, Division of Coverage & Enrollment Office of
Health Insurance Programs

SUBJECT: Elimination of Face-to-Face Interview For Medicare Savings Program

EFFECTIVE DATE: Immediately

CONTACT PERSON: Local District Support Unit:
Upstate (518)474-8887 NYC (212)417-4500

In an effort to simplify the application process for the Medicare Savings
Program (MSP), the face-to-face interview will be waived for potentially
eligible MSP applicants. Individuals applying for the Qualified Medicare
Beneficiary (QMB), Specified Low Income Medicare Beneficiary (SLIMB),
Qualified Individual-1 (QI-1) or Qualified Disabled and Working Individual
(QDWI) programs may now complete the application process by mail.

When an individual contacts the local department of social services
(LDSS) and asks to apply for the Medicare Savings Program, the LDSS must mail
the revised DOH-4328 (copy attached) to the individual. The DOH-4328 is to
be used for all Medicare Savings Program applications. The long application,
LDSS-2921, is no longer required when an individual is applying for MSP only.
Also attached is a sample cover letter that can be sent along with the
application and a Medicare Savings Program fact sheet (copy attached). Any
other enclosures that are usually sent to applicants must also be included in
the mailing.

The date of application will be the date a signed and dated application
is received in the Medicaid office. All applicants must provide photocopies
of the necessary documentation. The documentation must be kept in the case
record with a notation of the date received. Districts are reminded that
persons in receipt of Medicare are not required to provide documentation of
citizenship. District staff should contact the applicant/recipient (A/R) if
additional information is needed to process the application. All other
requirements for processing applications for the MSP remain unchanged.

The face-to-face interview is eliminated only when the applicant is
applying solely for the Medicare Savings Program. If an applicant indicates
that they want to apply for Medicaid with or without a spenddown, or if they
do not know what program they want to apply for, they must complete the full
application and appear for a face-to face interview according to current
procedures.

As a reminder, eligibility for QMB begins the first of the month
following the date of the application. SLIMB and QI-1 coverage may be
authorized for three months retroactive to the date of the application.
However, the QI-1 program may only be retroactive within the current calendar
year.
