GET HELP PAYING FOR YOUR
MEDICARE PART A COSTS!
January 2025

Great news for Medi-Cal members who are eligible for Medicare! A new change in
California can make it easier to sign up for Medicare Part A and get help with Medicare
costs. This change helps Medi-Cal members who must pay a premium for Medicare Part
A.
The Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) Program can help with your Medicare
costs. It may cover:
» Your Medicare Part A premium.
» Your Medicare Part B premium.
» Other Medicare costs, like deductibles and copayments.
If you are already signed up for Medicare Part B, Medi-Cal will automatically enroll you
in Medicare Part A and pay for your Medicare Part A costs through the QMB program if
you qualify. To learn more, please visit the Medicare Savings Program in California
webpage at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/MSPCal or the DHCS Medicare Premium Payment
(Buy-In) Program webpage at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Buyin.

Medicare Part A covers hospital and skilled nursing facility stays, rehab after the
hospital, and more. Medicare Part B covers preventive services like doctor visits and
medically necessary supplies such as walkers, wheelchairs, and more.

If you are not yet enrolled in the QMB program, you can get more information and
apply in one of these ways:
» Call or visit your local county office. Find their telephone number and address
here: https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/COL.
» Apply online through Benefits Cal: https://benefitscal.com/.
» Fill out the application form and mail it to your county office. Find the
application form and more information about the program here:
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/MSPCal.

January 2025 | 1

Do You Still Have Questions?
» Check with your local county office. They can tell you if you qualify for Medi-Cal
with your Medicare. You can also ask your county office about your Medi-Cal or
QMB status. Find their telephone number and address here:
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/COL.
» If Medi-Cal enrolled you in Medicare Part A, it helps pay your Medicare costs
through the QMB program. For questions about the QMB program, you can call
the Medi-Cal Helpline at (800) 541-5555.
» For questions about Medicare or SSI/SSP (Supplemental Security Income/State
Supplementary Payment) benefits, visit your local Social Security office or call
(800) 772-1213.
» For questions about Medicare billing, claims, or medical records, call (800)
MEDICARE [(800) 633-4227].
More Resources:
» For free one-on-one Medicare counseling, call the Health Insurance Counseling
and Advocacy Program (HICAP) at (800) 434-0222.
» If you need help with a problem that your health plan has not been able to
resolve, call the Medicare Medi-Cal Ombudsman Program (MMOP) at (855) 501-
3077.

January 2025 | 2
