Search this site:

File a Complaint

Consumers

File a Complaint

Ask a question or file a complaint

Check License Status

Check License Status

Types of Insurance

Understand different types of insurance

Health Insurance Information

Learn about health insurance

Company and Agent/Broker Information

Find information about insurance companies, agents and brokers

Laws & Regulations

Search insurance laws and regulations

Virtual Viewing Room

This virtual viewing room allows you to see insurance company rate filings, examination reports, and related information.

Dealing with Catastrophes

Prepare for natural disasters

Administrative Hearings and Public Programs

Learn about administrative hearings and other public programs

Cannabis and Insurance

Find out more about Cannabis and Insurance.

Bail Bonds

Learn more about surety bail bonds

Climate Change

Climate Change and Insurance

Information Guides

Information Guides

Wildfire Response and Readiness

Wildfire Response and Readiness

Seniors

Alerts

Review important Alerts, Advisories & Press Releases that impact Seniors.

Before You Buy Insurance

Things you should know before you buy insurance.

Health Coverage

Health plans are important for Seniors. Please review this important information.

Long Term Care

Find out if Long Term Care insurance is something for you.

Information Guides

Read information guides specifically designed for seniors.

Other Resources

We are providing additional information that you may find helpful.

Agents & Brokers

Check a License

Search for license status information based on license number or name.

Licensing Online Services

Convenience & Security at your Fingertips: Apply for an Insurance License, Schedule Examination, License Renewal, Change Your Address, and more.

Applying for a License

How to apply for a license for individual resident license, individual non-resident license, and business entity licenses.

Seeking Prelicensing / Continuing Education

Prelicensing and continuing education is required by law. Find how and where to get prelicensing and continuing education in this section.

Licensing Background Information

Information relating to licensing, background issues and information for producer license applicants regarding Proposition 64, the “Adult Use of Marijuana Act”.

Check License Application Status Service (CLASS)

Check License Application Status Service (CLASS)

Licensing Forms

List of necessary qualifications, requirements, fees and interactive forms for producer licensing. Plus prelicensing/continuing education forms.

Licensing Fees

Licensing Fees

Resident License Renewal

All you need to know about renewing your license.

Non-Resident License Renewal

All you need to know about renewing your non-resident license.

Print or Download Your License

Print or download license

Updating Licensee Info

Report a change of address, email address, add an endorsee to a business entity, and producer licensing background review guidelines.

Licensing Services Division Frequently Asked Questions

Producer Licensing Frequently Asked Questions

Applying to Become an Approved Education Provider

Education provider on-line programs to assist education providers in processing rosters and class schedules and in filing for provider status, course approval, and course development.

Agent & Broker ALERT

Agent & Broker ALERT Provided by California Insurance Commissioner's office

What’s New in the Licensing Services Division

Major changes in the Licensing Services Division since 2010 including regulations, programs, fees, etc.

Licensing Services Division Notices

Licensing Services Division Notices since 2010.

Mailing List for Producer

Mailing lists for active individuals, agencies, and insurance companies and order forms.

Insurers

Insurers

Insurers Applications, Forms and Filings, Bulletins & Notices, Programs, Officially Filed Reports of Examination

Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) Programs

Convenient method for the payment of Invoices and Premium Tax remittances. Separate enrollment is required for the Invoice Payments EFT Program and Tax EFT Program.

OASIS

Online Assistance System for Insurer Submittals (OASIS)

Legal Information

Insurance Code and Regulations, Proposed Regulations, Decisions and Rulings, Hearing Calendar.

Data & Reports

Market Share Reports, Consumer Complaint Study,Residential and Commercial Earthquake Insurance Coverage Study, Annual Report of the Commissioner, and More.

COIN

California Organized Investment Network (COIN) Is a Collaborative Effort Between the California Department of Insurance, the Insurance Industry, Community Affordable Housing and Economic Development Organizations, and Community Advocates.

Insurance Diversity Initiative

IDI is an effort to encourage Supplier Diversity and Governing Board Diversity within California’s insurance industry

P&C Rate Filing

Prior Approval Regulations, Workers' Compensation Rate Filings, Public Notices of Rate Filings.

CRC

Company Complaint Response Center

LRS

Auto Body Repair Labor Rate Survey Tool

Climate Risk Carbon Initiative

Interactive database that provides information on insurers' investments in fossil fuel

Climate Risk Disclosure Survey

View the Climate Risk Disclosure Survey Results

Fraud

Fraud Division Overview

The Fraud Division investigates suspected fraud committed by consumers or organized criminal elements perpetrated against insurance companies.

Investigation Division Overview

The Investigation Division investigates suspected fraud committed by insurance agents, brokers, public adjusters, bail agents, insurance companies and other individuals and entities transacting the business of insurance who perpetrate fraud against consumers.

File a Commendation or Complaint

Professional Standards Unit Civilian Commendation/Complaint Forms

Report Fraud

Link to CDI’s two suspected insurance fraud reporting systems – 1) Insurance Company Suspected Fraud Reporting Portal and, 2) Consumer Suspected Fraud Reporting Portal.

Insurance Fraud Grant Programs

Insurance Fraud Grant Programs

News

Press Releases

Official announcements, news releases.

Advisories

Advising media events and activities

CA Consumer Alerts

CA Consumer Alerts

Consumer Success Stories

Consumer success stories

Featured Topics

Provides links to featured topics

Studies, Reports & Publications

Market share reports, consumer complaint study, residential and commercial earthquake insurance coverage study, annual report of the commissioner, and more.

Multimedia

Video press conferences, public service announcements, hearings and public forums

About Us

Meeting Requests

Scheduling an appointment with Commissioner Lara

About the Commissioner

Information about the Commissioner

About the Department

Information about the Department's history and organization

Commissioner Appointments

Information about the Commissioner's Appointments to Boards and Committees

Career Opportunities

Employment opportunities within the Department of Insurance

Contact Us

Contact information for offices and entities

Seniors Information Center
/
Alerts
/ Medicare Supplement Insurance "Medigap"

Medicare Supplement Insurance "Medigap"

Senior Advisory Revised 08/20

Printable Version Available (PDF)

This advisory was prepared to help seniors understand recent changes to Medigap insurance for policies that take effect June 1, 2010 or later. The federal Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 required states to adopt certain changes to Medigap insurance policies. These changes became law in California on July 2, 2009 when Assembly Bill 1543 was signed by the Governor.

Medicare Supplement insurance, sometimes known as "Medigap" insurance, may be purchased by anyone enrolled in Medicare. Medigap Plans are designed to pay some of the out-of-pocket expenses that people have to pay when using their Medicare benefits.

Under the new law, all of the Medigap Plans have been revised; some of the lettered plans were changed, some were dropped and some new ones were added. These new Medigap Plans will not take effect until June 1, 2010-but they may be advertised and marketed early in 2010.

Q: Do I need to buy one of the new Medigap Plans?

A: No. If you are satisfied with your current Medigap Plan, you can keep it as long as you continue to pay the premiums. You should only buy one of the new Medigap Plans if your old Plan no longer meets your needs or if the premium is too high and you can buy a new Plan that meets your needs with a lower premium.

Q: What happens to the Medigap Plans people already have or buy before June 1, 2010?

A: Nothing happens to them. A Medigap Plan is guaranteed renewable for as long as you want to keep it and the premiums are paid. If you keep your current Medigap policy, your benefits will stay the same regardless of the changes to the law.

Q: How do these changes affect me?

A: In order to understand how the new law affects you, you need to know which type of Medigap Plan you have. If you are not sure, contact your insurance agent or the insurance company that issued your policy and ask.

Q: What changes did the new law make to Medigap Plans?

A: The following changes were made to Medigap Plans and will become effective June 1, 2010:

Two new Medigap Plans were added, Plans M and N, with new cost sharing rules.

Hospice benefit was added to the basic benefits of Plans A through D and Plans F and G (Plan E will no longer be available).

Benefits for excess charges in Plan G were increased to 100%.

Medigap Plans E, H, I, and J, including high-deductible Plan J, were dropped.

Preventive Care benefits were dropped from all Plans because Medicare now covers many of these benefits.

Home Recovery benefit was dropped from all Plans due to underuse.

Q: What other changes did the new law make to Medigap?

A: The following changes were made to Medigap rules that require companies to issue a Medigap policy without health screening and without a new waiting period limitation:

"Guaranteed issue" coverage now includes the right to buy a Medigap policy without health screenings or a new waiting period when an employer stops providing insurance that covers all of the cost for Medicare's 20% co-insurance.

"Open enrollment" rights have been extended to include COBRA and CalCOBRA when this extension of employer coverage is lost, or when a person is only eligible for "Medi-Cal with a share of cost" because of an increase in their income or assets.

When a person is entitled to "guaranteed issue" coverage or is applying under "open enrollment" rights, insurance companies cannot request, require or obtain medical information as part of the application process. The one exception to this rule occurs when a person is first enrolled in Medicare Part B; an insurance company can require answers to health questions as part of the application for a Medigap policy.

Q: What is the "Birthday Rule" and how does it apply to the new Medigap Plans?

A: If you already have Medigap insurance, you have 60 days of "open enrollment" following your birthday each year when you can buy a new Medigap policy without a medical screening or a new waiting period. The new policy must have the same or lesser benefits as your old policy. To avoid confusion, the new law specifies which of the new Plans are equal to the old Plans.

Q: Who can sell Medigap Plans?

A: Medicare/Medigap has no official sales agents. Licensed insurance agents can sell Medigap Plans to people with Medicare. Be wary of any salesperson who says that he/she is a Medicare representative. Medicare does not send "representatives" to solicit your business. Check on your insurance agent by contacting the California Department of Insurance at 1-800-927-HELP(4357) or visit our check license status on this website.

Q: Who can explain these Medigap changes to me?

A: Contact your insurance agent or the insurance company if you have questions about your Medigap policy and the new changes in Medigap Plans. You may also contact HICAP (Health Insurance Counseling and Advocacy Program) at 1-800-434-0222 for answers to many health insurance questions. For information about Medicare or Medigap call: 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227) or visit the Official U.S. Government Site for People with Medicare.

This advisory dated 02/10/2010 was prepared by the California Department of Insurance with valuable input from California Health Advocates.

Seniors Information Center

Alerts

Before You Buy Insurance

Health Coverage

Long Term Care

Information Guides

Other Resources

Google™ Translation Disclaimer

X

This Google™ translation feature is provided for informational purposes only.

The Department of Insurance is unable to guarantee the accuracy of this translation and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information resulting from the translation application tool.

The Department of Insurance is also unable to guarantee the same page layout for all the languages. Depending on the languages, the page layout may look strange from the original.

Please consult with a translator for accuracy if you are relying on the translation or are using this site for official business.

A copy of this disclaimer can also be found on our Disclaimer page.

Select a Language Below / Seleccione el Idioma Abajo

Close this box or use the [X]
