Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Manual Releases

MR #25.28: Elderly and/or Disabled Simplified Redetermination Demonstration Project (SNAP)

07/25/2025

Summary

The Elderly and/or Disabled Simplified Redetermination Demonstration Project (EDSRP) is a project approved by Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) and implemented by the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS) effective 11/30/2022. EDSRP seeks to increase participation in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) among the elderly and/or disabled adult low-income households by streamlining the application and recertification process.

This manual release replaces the policy in the Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual. The policy memo SNAP - Elderly and/or Disabled Simplified Redetermination Project, dated 12/2022 is obsolete.

The Integrated Eligibility System (IES) was modified with an EDSRP indicator that displays as a Special Approval Type of Assistance (TOA) and also displays on the Eligibility Summary page.

EDSRP is limited to SNAP households whose adult members are all elderly (age 60 and older) and/or disabled (age 18 and older), and the household does not have countable earned income to budget on the SNAP EDG.

All customers filing an initial SNAP application must have an interview. If determined eligible for SNAP and the customer's household meets the criteria to be in EDSRP, a 24-month certification period is assigned in Change Reporting status. The completion of an interim mid-point report during the certification period is not required for these households.

The Family Community Resource Center (FCRC) must explain the reporting requirements at the initial interview and at recertification (REDE).

Once approved with a 24-month certification, the case remains in EDSRP status until the next REDE. A change in the EDSRP household's income or the addition of a new member (regardless of age or disability) to the household during the certification period does not affect their current 24-month certification period. The FCRC may act on a reported change that may affect the benefit amount, but the household continues to remain in the 24-month certification period until the next REDE.

Medical, Cash and SNAP Redetermination Notice (Form IL444-1893) is system generated and mailed to the EDSRP household to complete a REDE approximately 60 days prior to the end of their certification period.

An interview is not required at REDE, unless the household requests an interview or the household no longer meets the criteria to remain in EDSRP. The FCRC may contact the household for clarification if information has been provided that is questionable. The household receives a Notice of Decision with information about their eligibility, certification period, benefit amount, reporting requirements, and rights and responsibilities.

The FCRC should use all available electronic verification sources prior to contacting or requesting verification from the EDSRP household. If the FCRC is unable to obtain all verifications needed to determine eligibility through an electronic source, then it may be necessary to send a Verification Checklist (IL444-0267) to request that the household provide verifications.

SNAP Elderly and/or Disabled Simplified Redetermination Demonstration Project (EDSRP) Implementation Overview

Who is in EDSRP?

Adult Members Under 60 Years Old

SNAP Household with Minor Child(ren)

SNAP Household with Ineligible Member

EDSRP or Regular SNAP Household

Initial Application

Verification Requirements

Changes Reported During the Certification Period

Redetermination

EDSRP and AABD Cash Redetermination Interview

No Longer Meets EDSRP Criteria at Redetermination

Not EDSRP at Initial Application but Qualifies At Redetermination

Tasks with Special Indicator EDSRP

Scheduling

Manual Revisions

Forms referenced:

SNAP Elderly and/or Disabled Simplified Redetermination Demonstration Project (EDSRP) Implementation Overview

The Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS) received waiver approval from Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) to implement a demonstration project that streamlines the application and recertification (REDE) process for elderly and/or disabled adults. The REDE process is simplified to reduce barriers to participation and to help these households maintain SNAP eligibility.

The demonstration project was implemented effective 11/30/2022. Active SNAP households meeting the EDSRP criteria and whose current certification period was 6 months prior to the implementation month had their certification extended from a 12-month certification period to a 24-month certification period in an Integrated Eligibility System (IES) mass update on 12/06/2022. An EDSRP indicator appears in IES as a Special Approval Type and on the Eligibility Summary page.

Six versions of Notice of Your Eligibility for the Elderly/Disabled Simplified Redetermination Project (EDSRP) were mailed to active SNAP households who qualified to be in EDSRP. The notice informed the SNAP household of their reporting requirements and of the extension to their certification period. The notice of the extension were as follows:

CN 22.07 extends certification period from November 2023 to November 2024.

CN 22.08 extends certification period from October 2023 to October 2024.

CN 22.09 extends certification period from September 2023 to September 2024.

CN 22.10 extends certification period from August 2023 to August 2024.

CN 22.11 extends certification period from July 2023 to July 2024.

CN 22.12 extends certification period from June 2023 to June 2024.

A simplified version of the Cash, Medical and SNAP Redetermination Application Notice (IL444-1893) was created for EDSRP households. The "Interview Required" was removed from the application for these households. The font size on the application was increased for easier reading and completion. Notice of Change (IL444-0360c) was revised to show a 24-month certification period for EDSRP households and includes information about their eligibility, certification period, benefit amount, reporting requirements, and rights and responsibilities.

Who is in EDSRP?

To be included in the EDSRP project all adult members in the SNAP household must be either:

Elderly (age 60 and older); or

Disabled (age 18 and older); and

Have no countable earned income (from employment or self-employment) to budget on the SNAP case.

Note: The SNAP household may be a combination of both adult elderly and disabled members.

Adult Members Under 60 Years Old

A person is considered age 60 in the month they become 60 years old.

Example: JT, age 59, filed a SNAP application on 08/05/2022. He will turn 60 years old in September. JT is not disabled. He does not have income. Eligibility is ran on 08/05/2022. IES builds regular SNAP for the month of August and EDSRP for the month of September and ongoing. Eligibility for qualifying member status begins in September 2022 based on JT's age.

If under age 60, then all adult members in the SNAP household must be at least age 18 or older and must meet the SNAP definition of a qualifying member (PM 05-06-01). Unearned income may be from one of the following sources: Primary RSDI Retirement Benefits, Primary RSDI Disability Benefits, RSDI Benefits as a Disabled Widow/Widower or Disabled Child, Railroad Retirement Benefits, Veteran's Benefits (partial or total disability), Federal, State, or Municipal Retirement, or Supplemental Security Income (SSI).

SNAP Household with Minor Child(ren)

All the adult members in SNAP households with minor children under the age of 18 must meet the criteria to be in the EDSRP. A SNAP household that does not have adult members that are all elderly and/or disabled and whose only disabled member is a minor child does not qualify to be in EDSRP.

Example 1: Ms. B, age 30, is requesting SNAP benefits for herself and her disabled 6-year old son TJ. Ms. B states during the interview that she does not work. TJ is receiving SSI benefits monthly. If eligible for SNAP, the household is approved under regular SNAP certification rules. The household does not meet the EDSRP criteria. Although Ms. B is an adult, she is not elderly and/or disabled. TJ is disabled but he does not meet the age requirement to be considered an adult.

Example 2: Ms. K, age 70, lives with her disabled daughter, age 40 and 3 minor grandchildren. At the interview, Ms. K states she receives a monthly retirement pension and Social Security benefits. Her daughter receives Social Security disability benefits. The minor children also receive Social Security because of their mother's disability. If eligible for SNAP, both adults in the household meet the criteria for EDSRP. Ms. K is elderly and her daughter is over age 18 and is disabled. Even though there are minor children in the SNAP household both adults meet the EDSRP criteria and are therefore eligible for EDSRP.

SNAP Household with Ineligible Member

If the SNAP household contains all EDSRP eligible adult member(s) and there is a member that does not qualify for SNAP, the household still qualifies for EDSRP as long as there is no earned income to budget for SNAP.

Example: Ms. B is 60 years old and her spouse is a 62 year old noncitizen who does not qualify for SNAP. Neither have earned income to budget. This is considered a SNAP household of one adult who is 60 years old. The presence of a noncitizen spouse that is ineligible for SNAP does not disqualify the SNAP household from EDSRP eligibility. If the spouse has no earned income, Ms. B is eligible for EDSRP, since all adult members of the SNAP household meet the criteria of the age requirement and/or disabled and have no earned income. IES will systematically determine if the noncitizen spouse qualifies for State Food. Note: If the 62 year old noncitizen spouse did have earned income then Ms. B would not be considered eligible for EDSRP.

EDSRP or Regular SNAP Household

Example 1: Mr. T, age 60, is applying for SNAP for himself and his wife, age 55. At the interview, Mr. T states that he is receiving Social Security benefits. His wife has never worked and does not have income. If eligible for SNAP, the household would be approved under regular SNAP certification rules as the household does not meet the EDSRP criteria. There are two adults in the SNAP household but only Mr. T meets the EDSRP criteria. His wife is not elderly and/or disabled. To be in EDSRP, all adults in the SNAP household must be elderly and/or disabled.

Example 2: Mr. G, age 65, lives with Ms. L, age 60. They are applying for SNAP. At the interview, Ms. L states food is bought and prepared together. Mr. G receives a monthly pension. Ms. L does not have income. If eligible for SNAP, both adults meet the age criteria to be in EDSRP.

Example 3: Mr. Z, age 65, and his wife, age 62, are applying for SNAP. At the interview, Mr. Z states he is receiving a monthly retirement pension. His wife is employed at a local childcare center. If eligible for SNAP, the household is approved under regular SNAP certification rules. The household does not meet the EDSRP criteria due to earned income.

Example 4: OB's SNAP case is in EDSRP status. OB is a 20 year old disabled male. At the time of approval OB was only receiving Social Security disability benefits. OB enrolled full-time at Wyman Community College and is now receiving earned income from federal work study. Since the earnings from work study is exempt (PM 08-04-04-b) and is not budgeted for SNAP, OB continues to meet the criteria to be in EDSRP.

Initial Application

A household applying for SNAP must have an initial interview. Regular SNAP policy and procedures are followed at initial application for all SNAP households, including those households that may qualify for EDSRP.

If determined eligible for SNAP and the household meets the criteria to be in EDSRP, the case is approved in Change Reporting status with a 24-month certification period. The completion of an interim mid-point report is not required of these households. All other SNAP households not meeting the EDSRP criteria continue to be certified for 12-months. Medical certification periods continue to be 12-months.

The FCRC must inform EDSRP households of their reporting requirements. EDSRP reporting requirements are also included in the Notice of Decision. EDSRP households are required to report the certain changes within 10 calendar days of the date the change became known to the household. See PM 18-04-00 for changes required to be reported by EDSRP households.

Note: There is no change to overpayment policy for EDSRP SNAP households. An unreported change that is required to be reported can potentially result in an overpayment but does not change the 24-month certification period.

Verification Requirements

All customers applying for benefits must provide verification of certain financial and nonfinancial eligibility factors, including customers who may qualify for EDSRP. In addition, verification must also be obtained for questionable information.

FCRC staff must always assist the customer in any way possible to obtain missing verification. Whenever possible, electronic sources should be used to help EDSRP households with providing any needed verifications. In some instances, electronic sources may not be able to verify information such as medical expenses and/or certain types of income and disabilities. In these instances, the EDSRP household is required to provide any verifications that the FCRC could not obtain.

Changes Reported During the Certification Period

If approved for SNAP and the SNAP household reports changes during the certification period that allow them to be EDSRP eligible, the regular SNAP rules continue to apply to the household until the next REDE.

When a change is reported by the EDSRP household, the case is reviewed to determine the effect of the reported change on eligibility and benefit amount. A reported change in the EDSRP household's income or the addition of a new member to the household during the certification period does not affect their current 24-month certification period. The FCRC should act on the reported change at the time of report but should not attempt to change the certification period. The household continues to remain in the 24-month certification period until the next REDE.

Example: Ms. R, age 65, filed a SNAP application for herself and her grandson, age 17. Her grandson is employed but is still in high school full-time. He is under the parental control of his grandmother. At the time of the initial approval for SNAP, the worker determined that the grandson's earned income was exempt from budgeting for SNAP. The SNAP household was approved in EDSRP. Ms. R is the only adult member, and she is elderly, and her grandson's earned income is exempt from budgeting on the SNAP case. Eight months after initial approval, Ms. R reports that her grandson has dropped out of school. His income is now budgeted for SNAP. No change is made to the 24-month certification period. At the next REDE the household is found to be no longer eligible for EDSRP.

Redetermination

IES systematically generates and mails the application to the EDSRP household prior to the end of the 24-month certification period to complete and return for processing. The household should return verifications where it is indicated on the application to attach proof. Whenever possible the FCRC should use electronic sources to help these households with the verification process so that eligibility can be determined and benefits can continue without interruption.

For EDSRP, an interview is not required at REDE, unless the SNAP EDSRP household requests one or the household no longer meets the criteria to remain in the demonstration project. The FCRC may contact the household for clarification if the household provides information that is questionable.

It is important for workers to review the REDE application and clearances prior to beginning data collection to ensure that changes have not occurred within the household that would change EDSRP status.

On the "Individual Interviewed/Applicant - Details" page, the worker selects the option "EDSRP - Interview Not Required" in the dropdown for SNAP households who meet the EDSRP criteria. An error message will display that requires the worker to select another interview type or schedule an interview if the "EDSRP Interview Not Required" option is selected and the SNAP household does not meet the criteria.

EDSRP and AABD Cash Redetermination Interview

For an EDSRP SNAP household whose member(s) also receive AABD Cash, an interview is required for the Cash REDE at 12-months. A change reported at the interview for the Cash REDE should be reviewed to determine if EDSRP SNAP eligibility is affected by the change.

EDSRP households are not required to have an interview at REDE and eligibility for EDSRP is not affected if a member fails to comply with a scheduled interview for AABD Cash.

On the "Individual Interviewed" page, If "EDSRP - Interview Not Required" value is selected and there is a Cash EDG on the case, the system will display a message that requires the worker to select another interview type: "CASH program requires an interview. Please select another interview mode."

No Longer Meets EDSRP Criteria at Redetermination

If the special indicator "EDSRP" displays when claiming the task from the Non-Expedited Cold Call Queue, review the application for changes that could result in a loss of EDSRP eligibility. If changes are reported that ends EDSRP eligibility, an interview is required. If no changes are reported that affect EDSRP eligibility, on the Cold Calling Details page enter EDSRP in the drop-down, labeled N/A Reason, and waive the interview.

If eligibility is run and the SNAP household no longer meets the EDSRP criteria, the FCRC should attempt to make two cold calls to the customer to conduct an interview. If the customer cannot be reached, do not complete data collection. Send Appointment Notice (IL444-0267T) to schedule an appointment. If the interview is missed and no contact has been made with the household, the application is denied no earlier than the 30th day after the application date.

Not EDSRP at Initial Application but Qualifies At Redetermination

A SNAP household that did not meet the EDSRP criteria at initial application may experience a change in household circumstances that meets EDSRP at REDE. If this change occurs, an interview is required at REDE.

Example: LB, age 62, was approved for SNAP in August 2024 in Mid-Point Reporting status. Due to his earned income he was not eligible for EDSRP at initial application. He also receives partial Social Security benefits. LB filed a SNAP REDE application in June 2025. He indicated on the application that he last worked April 30, 2025. At the interview, LB stated he was only working to pay off some medical expenses and does not plan to continue to work. If eligible for SNAP, LB now meets the criteria to be in EDSRP due to his age and no longer having earned income.

Tasks with Special Indicator EDSRP

When a task in the Electronic Document Management (EDM) Inbox has the EDM Inbox Special Indicator 'EDSRP', the system will route the task to the "Non-expedited Cold Call Details" queue. The worker indicates on the "Cold Calling Details" page that no first cold call attempt was made by selecting "N/A" from the "Did you make a first cold call attempt?" and indicates the reason 'EDSRP' in the "N/A Reason" field.

Scheduling

If 2 cold call attempts are unsuccessful, schedule the SNAP eligibility interview in the REDE calendar.

If the interview was waived and clearances report findings that could result in a loss of EDSRP status, attempt to call the customer.

If the 2 cold call attempts are unsuccessful, the worker should stop where they are in the driver flow and schedule an interview for the customer.

Manual Revisions

PM 06-31-00

PM 06-31-01

PM 06-31-02

PM 06-31-03

PM 06-31-04

PM 06-31-05

Glossary (E)

WAG 06-31-00

WAG 06-31-01

WAG 06-31-02

WAG 06-31-03

WAG 06-31-04

WAG 06-31-05

Ee (Abbreviations and Acronyms)

[signed copy on file]

Dulce M. Quintero

Secretary, Illinois Department of Human Services

Forms referenced:

CN 22.07

CN 22.08

CN 22.09

CN 22.10

CN 22.11

CN 22.12

IL444-0267

IL444-0267T

IL444-0360C

IL444-1893

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
