Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 11: AABD Cash Eligibility and Benefit Amount

PM 11-01-00: AABD Cash Assistance Standard

PM 11-01-02: Shelter

PM 11-01-02-a: Separate or Shared Living Arrangement

WAG 11-01-02-a.

When the client lives with other persons, determine if the client has a separate or shared living arrangement.

Separate Living Arrangement

The client has a separate living arrangement when:

they live in the same dwelling as their landlord and are required to pay a flat fee for shelter, and

they do not share any shelter or household expenses with the other persons in the dwelling, and

they are not under age 18 and living with their parents, or are not legally responsible for other persons living in the dwelling.

The client also has a separate living arrangement if they are acting as the landlord and are charging the other person(s) a flat shelter fee for living in the same dwelling.

Separate living arrangements are possible in a dwelling where the client's landlord is also the client's parent. The client's relationship to the other persons in the dwelling is not a factor, unless the client is under age 18 and
living with their parent, or is legally responsible for another person in the dwelling.

Consider a non-responsible relative who is receiving TANF benefits for a child who lives with them as being in a separate living arrangement.

When the client has a separate living arrangement, do not prorate shelter and utility expenses among all the persons in the dwelling.

Shared Living Arrangement

The client is in a shared living arrangement when:

they pool their funds with all the other persons living in the dwelling to cover shelter and utility expenses; or

they share responsibility for shelter related expenses or daily household activities, including food purchases; or

they are under age 18 and living with their parent(s), or are legally responsible for other persons in the dwelling; or

they pay all shelter costs and provide free shelter to the other persons living in the dwelling.

When the client is legally responsible for another person living in the dwelling, or when the client lives with a person who is legally responsible for them, the living arrangement is shared. For example, a client and spouse who live
in the same dwelling are in a shared living arrangement. Also, a 17 year old AABD Cash client who lives with their parent(s) is in a shared living arrangement.

The client does not have to be paying a proportionate share of the expenses for the situation to be a shared living arrangement. When the client is in a shared living arrangement, prorate shelter and utility allowances among the number of persons in
the shared living arrangement.

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
