Skip to content

Program Operations Manual System (POMS)

Effective Dates: 05/16/1994 - Present
Previous | Next

TN 117 (12-23)

SI 01130.400 Burial Spaces

A. Policy — the exclusion

1. General

A burial space or agreement which represents the purchase of a burial space held for
the burial of the individual, their spouse, or any other member of their immediate
family is an excluded resource, regardless of value.

2. No Effect on Burial Funds Exclusion

The burial space exclusion is in addition to, and has no effect on, the burial funds
exclusion (SI 01130.410).

3. Multiple Burial Spaces

Of items that serve the same purpose, we will exclude only one per person. For example,
we will exclude a cemetery lot and a casket for the same person, but not a casket
and an urn.

4. Spaces Held by Deemors

Spaces held by deemors for the burial of an eligible individual, their spouse and/or
any member of the eligible individual's immediate family (including the deemor) are
excludable.

Spaces held by an alien sponsor or essential person for their own burial are excludable
only if the sponsor/essential person is a member of the eligible individual's immediate
family.

B. Definitions

1. Burial Space

A burial space is a(n):

•

burial plot;

•

gravesite;

•

crypt;

•

mausoleum;

•

casket;

•

urn;

•

niche; or

•

other repository customarily and traditionally used for the deceased's bodily remains.

The term also includes necessary and reasonable improvements or additions to such
spaces, including but not limited to:

•

vaults;

•

headstones, markers, or plaques;

•

burial containers (e.g., for caskets); and

•

arrangements for the opening and closing of the gravesite.

For example, a contract for care and maintenance of the gravesite, sometimes referred
to as endowment or perpetual care, can be excluded as a burial space.

2. Agreement Which Represents the Purchase of a Burial Space

An agreement which represents the purchase of a burial space is a contract with a
burial provider for a burial space held for the eligible individual or a member of
their immediate family.

3. Individual's Immediate Family

“Individual” means the SSI recipient or claimant.

The individual's immediate family includes their:

•

parents, including adoptive parents;

•

minor or adult children, including adoptive and stepchildren;

•

siblings (brothers and sisters), including adoptive and stepsiblings.

“Immediate family” also includes the spouse of the above relatives. If the relative's relationship to
the recipient is by marriage only, the marriage must be in effect in order for the
burial space exclusion to continue to apply. For example, a burial space held for
a sister-in-law is no longer excludable if if the recipient's sibling divorces the
sister-in-law.

4. Held For

A burial space is “held for” an individual when someone currently has:

•

title to and/or possesses a burial space intended for the individual's use (e.g.,
has title to a burial plot or owns a burial urn stored in the basement for their own
use); or

•

a contract with a funeral service company for specified burial spaces for the individual's
burial (i.e., an agreement which represents the individual's current right to the
use of the items at the amount shown).

Until the purchase price is paid in full, a burial space is not “held for” an individual under an installment sales contract or similar device if:

•

the individual does not currently own the space;

•

the individual does not currently have the right to use the space; and

•

the seller is not currently obligated to provide the space.

Until all payments are made on the contract, the amounts paid may be considered burial
funds. See SI 01130.410.

C. Procedure — development and documentation

The following procedures do not apply to installment burial contracts or insurance funded burial contracts. For installment
contracts, see SI 01130.420. For insurance funded contracts, see SI 01130.425.

1. General

a.

If an individual alleges owning only one burial space, or an individual and spouse
allege owning no more than two spaces, assume that the spaces are excluded.

b.

If an individual or individual and spouse allege owning more than one or two spaces,
respectively, obtain a statement signed or recorded on a Report of Contact showing:

•

the name of the person for whose burial each space is intended; and

•

the relationship of each such person to the individual.

Exclude only those spaces that are alleged to be for the burial of the individual,
the spouse, or a member of the immediate family.

2. Deemors in the Immediate Family

a.

If the deemor alleges owning no more than one space, assume it is excluded.

b.

If the deemor alleges owning more than one space, proceed as in 1.b. above, obtaining
the statement or Report of Contact from the deemor and excluding only those spaces
alleged to be for the burial of the individual, such individual's spouse, or a member
of such individual's immediate family.

3. Sponsors or Essential Persons Not Part of Immediate Family

No assumptions apply to burial spaces owned by a sponsor or essential person who is
not a member of the immediate family. Obtain from the sponsor or essential person the
statement described in 1.b. above and exclude only those spaces alleged to be for
the burial of the individual, such individual's spouse, or a member of such individual's
immediate family. Do not exclude a space held for the sponsor's or essential person's
own use.

4. Agreements Which Represent the Purchase of a Burial Space

a. General

If the contract shows the purchase of a specified burial space at a specified price,
determine whether such space is held for the individual or member of the individual's
immediate family per B.4. above.

If the space is held for the individual, determine if the contract is irrevocable
or revocable. If irrevocable, it is not a resource. If the contract is revocable,
it is an excludable resource. (See SI 01130.420 C.3. on single-purpose burial space contracts.)

NOTE: Whether a contract representing the purchase of a burial space is irrevocable or
revocable may be important if there is a dollar limit on irrevocable contracts in
the State in which the contract was purchased.

b. Installment Contracts

If the contract calls for installment payments, determine whether the value of the
burial space has to be treated as burial funds (SI 01130.420 C.5.c.).

D. References

•

Burial funds exclusion, SI 01130.409 ff. and SI 01130.410 ff.

•

Prepaid burial contracts, SI 01130.420.

•

Interest earned on excluded burial space purchase agreements, SI 00830.501.

•

Conditional benefits, SI 01150.200ff

To Link to this section - Use this URL:
http://policy.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0501130400

SI 01130.400 - Burial Spaces - 05/16/1994

Batch run: 06/16/2026

Rev:05/16/1994
