Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

Customers

Services by Division

Family & Community Services

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program - SNAP

What is the purpose of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)?

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (formerly Food Stamps) helps low-income people and families buy the food they need for good health.

Benefits are provided on the Illinois Link Card - an electronic card that is accepted at most grocery stores. The program is managed by the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) of the United States Department of Agriculture. The Department of Human Services administers the program in Illinois.

Who can receive these services?

Most households with low income can get SNAP benefits. The rules are complex, so all of the details are not here. The most important factors which determine the amount of, and eligibility for, SNAP benefits are:

income and expenses;

the number of persons who live and eat together

Use the SNAP Eligibility Calculator to give an estimate of possible benefits. This is only an estimate.

Your application must be reviewed by IDHS staff at the Family Community Resource Center. If you apply for benefits and are eligible, you will receive a notice of your eligibility.

Income

A household might be eligible to receive SNAP benefits if their monthly gross income does not exceed the gross income limits shown below.

SNAP Program Income and Benefit Amounts (English Version) - DHS 124

SNAP Program Income and Benefit Amounts (Spanish Version) - DHS 124S

Households without Disabled or Elderly Persons (age 60 or over) Maximum Monthly Income Allowable

Household Size

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Gross Monthly Income Limit (165% FPL)

$2,152

$2,909

$3,665

$4,421

$5,177

$5,934

$6,690

$7,446

$8,203

$8,960

For household with more than 10 persons, add $757 for each additional person. (Updated 10/1/2025)

Age 60 & Over or Disabled Households Maximum Monthly Income Allowable

Household Size

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Gross Monthly Income Limit (For those Age 60 or older OR Disabled)

(200% FPL)

$2,608

$3,525

$4,441

$5,358

$6,275

$7,191

$8,108

$9,025

$9,941

$10,858

For each elderly and disabled household with more than 10 persons, add $917 for each additional person. (Updated 10/1/2025)

Who can't receive SNAP Benefits?

Federal rules say some people can't get SNAP benefits regardless of the amount of their income. For example, most boarders, certain non-citizens, most strikers, and people who live in certain institutions.

How much does someone get each month?

The monthly SNAP Benefit amount depends on the number of people in the "SNAP unit" and the monthly income available to meet needs after the caseworker subtracts the allowable deductions (such as rent and utilities) from gross income. The chart below shows the highest monthly benefit by household size. Depending on income, this amount could be less.

SNAP Program Income and Benefit Amounts (English Version) - DHS 124

SNAP Program Income and Benefit Amounts (Spanish Version) - DHS 124S

Are there more rules?

Yes. Here are some other rules to consider.

We expect people who can work to try and do so.

We may ask for proof of certain information.

Changes in a person's situation must be reported.

Eligibility is reviewed from time to time.

How are the services provided?

Benefits are provided on the Illinois Link Card - an electronic card that is accepted at most grocery stores. The program is managed by the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) of the United States Department of Agriculture. The Department of Human Services administers the program in Illinois.

What services are offered?

SNAP benefits can be used to buy:

any food or food product for human consumption,

seeds and plants for use in home gardens to produce food.

SNAP benefits cannot be used to buy:

Hot foods ready to eat,

Food intended to be heated in the store,

Lunch counter items or foods to be eaten in the store,

Vitamins or medicines,

Pet foods,

Any nonfood items (except seeds and plants),

Alcoholic beverages,

Tobacco

Menstrual products and diapers. The USDA does not currently have a waiver for states to allow customers to purchase menstrual products or diapers with SNAP/WIC benefits.

* Services that you may participate in:

EarnFare - gain valuable work experience

SNAP Employment & Training Job Placement - obtain employer-provided training

TANF Job Placement - assist in addressing barriers to employment

Child Care

Housing

Pregnancy & Parenting

Violence & Abuse Prevention

How to apply?

See Apply for SNAP, Cash, or Medical Assistance to learn how to apply.

Emergency Benefits

Emergency SNAP Benefits are benefits that are ready in 5 days or less from the date you apply.

Report a Change of Information

If you receive SNAP benefits, see the Change of Information: Address, Income or Assets page for instructions on what changes to report and how to report.

Publications

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Spanish - DHS 124DS

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) - DHS 124D

More Information & Resources

SNAP Federal Impact Center

SNAP Support

SNAP Eligibility Calculator

SNAP Discrimination Notice

Become an Illinois Link Provider and accept SNAP at your business.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture provides several resources to help people eat healthy meals on a low budget including:

10-Tips Nutrition Series

ChooseMyPlate.gov

The USDA Recipe Box helps people find healthy low cost recipes and create cookbooks and shopping lists.

Other Programs

SNAP customers may qualify for assistance to help pay for installation of telephone service and monthly charges for local phone service through the Lifeline and Link-Up Telephone Assistance Programs.

Links

SNAP Eligibility Calculator

SNAP Support

Apply For Cash, SNAP & Medical Assistance

ABE Customer Support

Illinois Link Card

Noncitizen Eligibility Changes

SNAP Employment & Training Job Placement

SNAP Work Requirements & Exemptions

SNAP Nondiscrimination Statement

Quality Control for SNAP

SNAP Integrity Management Evaluation Surveys

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
