Skip to content

Program Operations Manual System (POMS)

Effective Dates: 12/04/2012 - Present
Previous | Next

TN 29 (07-90)

SI 01120.210 Retirement Funds

A. Definitions

1. Retirement Funds

Retirement funds are annuities or work- related plans for providing income when employment
ends (e.g., pension,disability, or retirement plans administered by an employer or
union). Other examples are funds held in an individual retirement account (IRA) and
plans for self-employed individuals, sometimes referred to as Keogh plans. Also, depending
on the requirements established by the employer, some profit sharing plans may qualify
as retirement funds.

2. Periodic Retirement Benefits

Periodic retirement benefits are payments made to an individual at some regular interval
(e.g., monthly) and which result from entitlement under a retirement fund.

3. Value of a Retirement Fund

The value of a retirement fund is the amount of money that an individual can currently
withdraw from the fund. If there is a penalty for early withdrawal, the fund's value
is the amount available to an individual after penalty deduction. However, any taxes
due are not deductible in determining the fund's value.

B. Policy Principle

A retirement fund owned by an eligible individual is a resource if he/she has the
option of withdrawing a lump sum even though he/she is not eligible for periodic payments.
However, if the individual is eligible for periodic payments, the fund may not be
a countable resource. See E.1. below if an individual is eligible for periodic payments.

A previously unavailable retirement fund is not income to its recipient when the fund
becomes available. The fund is subject to resources counting rules in the month following
the month in which it first becomes available.

C. Operating Policies

1. Termination of Employment

A retirement fund is not a resource if an individual must terminate employment in
order to obtain any payment.

2. Fund Not Immediately Available

A resources determination for the month following that in which a retirement fund
becomes available for withdrawal must include the fund's value. A delay in payment
for reasons beyond the individual's control (e.g., an organization's processing time)
does not mean that the fund is not a resource since the individual is legally able
to obtain the money. It is a nonliquid resource.

3. Claim For Periodic Payment Denied

If an individual receives a denial on a claim for periodic retirement payments but
can withdraw the funds in a lump sum,include the fund's lump sum value in the resources
determination for the month following that in which the individual receives the denial
notice.

D. Development and Documentation

1. Evidence

If an individual has a retirement fund,determine and document whether he/she is eligible
for periodic payments per SI 00510.001 ff. If not, determine and document whether he/she can make a lump-sum withdrawal.

2. Determination

If the individual can withdraw any of the retirement fund, it is a resource in the
amount that is currently available.

E. Related Policies

1. Filing For Other Benefits

If an individual is eligible for periodic retirement benefits, he/she must apply for
those benefits to be eligible for SSI. If he/she has a choice between periodic benefits
and a lump sum, he/she must choose the periodic benefits.

2. Nonliquid Resource

Absent evidence to the contrary, assume that resources in the form of retirement funds
are nonliquid (SI 01110.300 B.).

3. Conditional Benefits

An individual with excess nonliquid resources, such as retirement funds, may qualify
for conditional benefits while awaiting payment (SI 01150.200 ff.).

4. Deeming Exclusion

If an ineligible spouse, parent, or spouse of parent owns a retirement fund,we exclude
it from the deeming process (SI 01330.120 and 01330.220). See SI 00830.500 regarding the treatment of interest income.

F. Example

1. Situation

Jeff Grant currently works 3 days a week for a company where he has been employed
full-time for 20 years. Under his employer's pension plan, Mr. Grant has a $4,000
retirement fund. The CR confirms that Mr. Grant could withdraw the funds now, but
there would be a penalty for early withdrawal and he would forfeit eligibility for
an annuity when he stopped working.

2. Analysis

Since Mr. Grant can withdraw the retirement funds without terminating employment,
they are a resource in the amount available after penalty deduction. This is true
despite the fact Mr. Grant forfeits eligibility for periodic annuity payments in the
future. Since SSI is a current needs program, all sources of available support (unless
otherwise excluded) are considered in determining eligibility.

To Link to this section - Use this URL:
http://policy.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0501120210

SI 01120.210 - Retirement Funds - 12/04/2012

Batch run: 06/24/2026

Rev:12/04/2012
