Skip to content

Program Operations Manual System (POMS)

Effective Dates: 03/07/2023 - Present
Previous | Next

TN 77 (03-23)

HI 00805.270 General Eligibility Requirements for the Special Enrollment Period - Group Health
Plans

A. Policy for general eligibility requirements

An individual is eligible to enroll under the Group Health Plan/Large Group Health
Plan (GHP/LGHP) Special Enrollment Period (SEP) provisions if the individual meets
one of the following requirements.

1. No previous Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) enrollment

If the individual did not enroll in the initial enrollment period (IEP), the individual
must be covered under a group health plan (GHP) based on own or a spouse’s current
employment status in the first month of eligibility for SMI and for all months thereafter.
If the individual was covered under a large group health plan (LGHP), the coverage
must be based on own, or a family member’s current employment status.

The first month of eligibility for SMI is the fourth month of the IEP, as explained
in HI 00805.015.

2. Previous SMI entitlement

If the individual enrolled during an IEP and later terminated SMI coverage, the individual
must be covered under a GHP based on own , or a spouse’s, current employment status
the month of SMI termination and for all months thereafter. If the individual was
covered under a large group health plan (LGHP), the coverage must be based on own,
or a family member’s current employment status.

NOTE: If the individual previously enrolled during the GEP, the individual must have enrolled
in SMI or have coverage under a GHP or LGHP in the first month of eligibility for
SMI.

3. Subsequent SEP

If the individual enrolled in SMI during an SEP, and later terminated SMI coverage,
the individual must be covered under a GHP based on own, or a spouse’s, current employment
status the month of SMI termination and for all months thereafter. If the individual
was covered under a large group health plan (LGHP), the coverage must be based on
own, or a family member’s current employment status.

NOTE: There is no limit on the number of subsequent SEPs. However, to have a subsequent
SEP, the individual must enroll during the earlier SEPs available to the individual.
Enrollment during a GEP that falls within an SEP satisfies the requirement for an
"earlier SEP enrollment.”

B. Reference

HI 00805.275 SEP Enrollments-Break in Employment or GHP/LGHP Coverage

To Link to this section - Use this URL:
http://policy.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0600805270

HI 00805.270 - General Eligibility Requirements for the Special Enrollment Period - Group Health Plans - 03/07/2023

Batch run: 10/10/2024

Rev:03/07/2023
