N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 § 387.17 - Certification/authorization

State Regulations

Compare

(a) Households
eligible for receipt of food stamp benefits shall be authorized to receive
those benefits by means of a State-prescribed form(s). Such authorization shall
be effective for a specific period of time, known as the certification period,
which coincides with the periods of eligibility determinations and
redeterminations. Such an authorization shall contain all pertinent information
as to the status of the household and the amount of food stamp benefits. When
the certification period ends, food stamp entitlement expires and cannot
continue without a recertification application and eligibility determination.
Certification periods shall be as follows:

(1) For public assistance (PA) cases, except
those required to report quarterly, the food stamp certification period will be
the same as the PA certification period plus one month, but not more than a
total of 12 months.

(2) At least
for three months, except:
(i) for those
households which at the time of initial certification had their certification
process completed after the 15th day of the month of application and also had
circumstances which warranted it, the certification period shall be increased
by one month;

(ii) when the
household cannot reasonably predict what its circumstances will be in the near
future, or when there is a substantial likelihood of frequent and significant
changes in income or household status, the certification period shall not be
more than two months;

(iii) for
those households which have little likelihood of changes in income and
household status, the certification period shall be up to 12 months;

(iv) for those households in which all adult
household members are disabled or elderly persons with very stable income, the
certification period shall be up to 24 months;

(v) for those households whose primary source
of income is from self-employment (including self-employed farmers) or from
regular farm employment, including farm workers whose annual salaries are paid
on a scheduled and unchanging monthly basis, provided income can be readily
predicted and household circumstances are not likely to change, the
certification period will be up to 12 months;

(vi) for all cases subject to six-month
reporting under subdivision (d) of this section, the certification period will,
notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, be six months, except
for those households residing within social services districts that have been
given written permission by the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
to lengthen the certification periods to more than six months but not longer
than 12 months. For those social services districts authorized to lengthen the
certification periods beyond six months, households subject to six-month
reporting shall be required to submit a periodic report in the sixth month in
accordance with subdivision (e) of this section; and

(vii) for those households which are granted
separate household status, in accordance with section
387.1(t)(2)(i)(c) and
(d) of this Part because the household
consists of an individual and that individual's minor child(ren) living with
the individual's parent or sibling and purchasing and preparing meals separate
from the parent/sibling, the eligibility/certification period will not exceed
six months.

(3)
Households certified on an expedited basis that have provided all necessary
verification prior to certification, shall be assigned normal certification
periods. Households that postponed verification may be certified only for the
month of application (the month of application and the subsequent month for
those applying after the 15th of the month). A normal certification period may
be assigned to those households whose circumstances would otherwise warrant a
longer certification period.

(4)
Social services districts may lengthen a household's certification period as
long as the total months of the certification period does not exceed the limits
described in subparagraphs (2)(i) through (vi) of this subdivision. In
extending certification periods, a notice of intent must be sent advising the
household of its new certification period ending date.

(5) Social services districts may only
shorten a household's certification period when the social services district
either receives verified information that the household is ineligible for food
stamps or the household has failed to cooperate with the social services
district in clarifying its circumstances. When a certification period is
shortened pursuant to this paragraph, a notice of adverse action must be sent
to the household.

(b)
The local department shall notify the household in writing of the decision
regarding the household's eligibility for food stamp benefits based on an
initial application. Such notice shall be provided as soon as the decision is
made but no later than 30 days from the date of the initial
application.

(c) All eligible SNAP
households shall receive a payment access card, as prescribed by the
department, issued in the name of the household member who is authorized to
receive the household's SNAP allotment.

(d) Six-month reporting.

(1) The following definitions are used in
this subdivision:
(i) Six-month reporting
refers to a reporting system used for households with earned income in
accordance with instructions from the Office of Temporary and Disability
Assistance. It is a system in which information concerning the incomes and
circumstances of food stamp recipient households with earned income are
required to report every six months at recertification or to submit a periodic
report. Households that are subject to six-month reporting are required to
report only changes in the amount of gross monthly income exceeding 130 percent
of the monthly Federal poverty income guideline for their household size. In
addition, households with able-bodied adults without dependents who are subject
to the six-month reporting rules as described in paragraph (4) of this
subdivision must also report changes in work status that affect food stamp
eligibility.

(ii) Periodic report
means a form upon which a recipient household that is subject to six-month
reporting reports income and household circumstances for food stamps for the
most recent six-month period. Households are required to file such a report for
social services districts that have been given written permission by the Office
of Temporary and Disability Assistance to have certification periods of seven
full months or greater. The social services district must act on any change
reported by such households on the periodic report in accordance with paragraph
(e)(6) of this section. A periodic report is considered complete when the
household has:
(a) answered all
questions;

(b) provided
verification of all reported income; and

(c) signed and dated the report on or after
the last day of the fifth month of the report period.

(iii) Primary source means information
received from employers concerning wages paid to a household, computer match
information about Federal benefits received from the Social Security
Administration, information from the New York State Department of Labor or
local district employment contractor that a food stamp recipient has failed to
comply with a food stamp work requirement, a determination by a court,
administrative hearing or disqualification consent agreement of an intentional
program violation, or actions taken by other programs under the authority of a
social services district that affect budgeting for food stamps.

(iv) Process month means the month in which
information contained in a periodic report or obtained during a certification
is reviewed. With respect to information obtained at recertification, the
process month is the last month of the authorization period. A new food stamp
budget is required to be authorized in the month following the month of a
process month with respect to the information obtained if the information
indicates a change has occurred and a new benefit level is to be determined as
a result of the change.

(v)
Verified upon receipt means that information is received from the primary
source and it is not questionable. A report of a change in income cannot be
considered as verified upon receipt unless it includes an exact new income
amount, effective date of receipt and any other information needed to
recalculate the food stamp benefit amount. When information has been reported
to another program area directly administered by the local social services
district such as Medicaid, or family and children services and the information
is verified by that program, then the change must be considered verified by the
food stamp division of the local social services district and acted upon by the
division if it would affect benefits or eligibility for food stamp
benefits.

(2) For any
month that a household's gross income exceeds 130 percent of poverty, the
household must report their monthly income by the 10th day of the month
following the month in which they exceeded the limit. If a food stamp household
subject to six-month reporting fails, without good cause, to return a completed
periodic report by the 10th day of the process month, the social services
district must send a timely and adequate notice of discontinuance. Any changed
circumstances reported on the periodic report that results in changes in
benefits must be noticed to households using adequate notice.

(3) Group home households/residents with
earned income are excluded from food stamp six-month reporting rules if they
are in receipt of supplemental security income (SSI) or social security
disability benefits. Households eligible for a transitional benefit alternative
are exempt from reporting changes in the monthly gross income level while they
are in the transitional benefit period. At the end of the transitional benefit
period, households subject to the six-month reporting rules will be required to
certify that their gross income does not exceed 130 percent of poverty.
Households with certification periods of less than six months in duration are
excluded from the six-month reporting rules.

(4) Households subject to six-month reporting
rules with able bodies adults without dependent(s) (ABAWD) may be required by
the social services district to report on a monthly basis changes in working
hours that would affect food stamp eligibility. For a household subject to the
food stamp six-month reporting rules, the social services district must act on
reported changes that affect food stamp eligibility and benefit amounts only if
the information is:
(i) that the total
monthly household income exceeds 130 percent of poverty;

(ii) verified upon receipt;

(iii) reported on the food stamp periodic
report;

(iv) reported at
recertification;

(v) reported
pursuant to public assistance reporting requirements and the action is taken on
the public assistance budget. However, if a household in receipt of public
assistance and food stamps fails to submit a public assistance quarterly
report, no action for discontinuance of food stamps for failure to submit the
report can be taken;

(vi)
voluntarily reported and verified and the information increases the food stamp
benefit;

(vii) that a household
requests to have its food stamp case closed; or

(viii) that a household member does not meet
ABAWD requirements.

For households in receipt of public assistance and food
stamps subject to the six-month reporting rules, workers in the social services
districts must not act on, or compute food stamp overpayment amounts for,
change reports other than those listed in the subparagraphs of this
paragraph.

(5)
If the recipient responds to the discontinuance notice and submits a completed
report before the effective date of the discontinuance, the social services
district must accept the completed periodic report and void the notice of
discontinuance.

(6) Good cause for
failure to submit a completed periodic report.

(i) Good cause for the failure to return a
completed periodic report by the end of the process month exists only in the
following situations:
(a) the recipient has a
physical or mental condition which prevents complete reporting;

(b) the failure of the recipient to submit a
complete report is directly attributable to Office of Temporary and Disability
Assistance or social services district error; or

(c) there are other extenuating circumstances
under which the recipient cannot reasonably be expected to fulfill the
responsibility to report for reasons beyond the recipient's control.

(7) Projecting average
income. The amount of earned income used to determine food stamp benefits will
be based on an estimate of average monthly earnings. To project average monthly
income, a social services district must average the weeks of earned income
reported, but no less than the most recent four weeks of income, or if there
has been a change expected to last at least 30 days, use the new information
regarding the amount of pay and the frequency of pay. Income which is not of a
continuing nature must not be included for purposes of projecting average
income.

(8) Average monthly income
is applied against need to determine the amount of food stamp benefits for each
calendar month of a certification period. The amount of average earned income
applied must be recalculated at recertification and when a periodic report is
received by the agency. Adjustments to benefits will be made prospectively
whenever information is received in accordance with paragraph (4) of this
subdivision.

(9) Verification
required with the periodic report.
(i) The
household must provide verification of current income and any child care costs
incurred in the most recent month whether or not changes have occurred in such
amounts. Failure to provide verification of current income will result in
closure of the food stamp case. Failure to provide verification of child care
costs will result in loss of child care deductions.

(ii) The household must provide verification
of any other reported changes in household circumstances. The social services
district must act on any change which would produce a decrease in benefits
whether or not it is verified, but must not act on an unverified change which
would produce an increase in benefits.

(iii) A social services district must afford
a household the opportunity to verify child care costs and costs identified in
subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph in accordance with paragraph (e)(3) of this
section with respect to any change which it has initially failed to verify in
the period report. Changes reported in a periodic report will be considered as
having been reported on the date the report is received.

(iv) A social services district must not
require verification of information prior to the most recent calendar month for
a periodic report. A social services district must not require verification of
changes reported outside of the periodic report and recertification that are
not required to be reported by a household that is subject to six-month
reporting.

(e) Household responsibility to report
changes in circumstances.
(1) Households
certified to receive food stamps must report the following changes:

(i) changes in the sources of income, or
changes in the amount of gross monthly earned income of more than $100, gross
monthly unearned income from private sources of more than $100 or gross monthly
unearned income from public sources of more than $25. This requirement does not
include changes in the public assistance grant;

(ii) all changes in household
composition;

(iii) changes in
residence and any resulting changes in shelter costs;

(iv) the acquisition of a licensed
vehicle;

(v) when cash on hand,
stocks, bonds, and money in a bank account or savings institution reach or
exceed the appropriate allowable resource limit as set forth in section
387.9(b)(1) of
this Part; and

(vi) actual utility
expenses claimed by a household if the source has changed or the amount has
changed by more than $25.

(2) Households certified to receive food
stamps must report changes within 10 days of the date the change becomes known
to the household.

(3) Households
applying for food stamps must report all changes related to its eligibility and
benefits at the certification interview. Changes, as set forth in paragraph (1)
of this subdivision, which occur after the interview but before the date of the
notice of eligibility, must be reported by the household within 10 days of the
date of the notice of eligibility.

(4) Households subject to six-month reporting
rules are not required to submit any reports of changes other than changes in
monthly gross income that exceed 130 percent of the monthly Federal poverty
income guidelines for their household size except as otherwise set forth in
this paragraph. Households subject to six-month reporting rules with
certification periods of seven full months or greater must submit a periodic
report for the most recent six-month period. Households with able bodies adults
without dependences (ABAWDs) who are subject to six-month reporting rules as
set forth in paragraph (d)(4) of this section must report as required by the
social services district to meet ABAWD requirements.

(5) Changes reported over the telephone by
non-six-month reporting households or in person by all food stamp households
shall be acted upon in the same manner as those reported on the
State-prescribed change report form. A supply of these report forms shall be
provided to the applicant/recipient of food stamps at initial certification and
at recertification interviews.

(6)
Prompt action shall be taken on all reported changes to determine the effect on
the household's eligibility and food stamp allotment. All reported changes
shall be documented in the case file according to the date reported.

(i) For changes that result in an increase in
a household's benefits, other than changes described in subparagraph (ii) of
this paragraph, the social services district must make the change effective no
later than the first allotment issued 10 days after the date the change was
reported to the social services district.

(ii) For changes that result in an increase
in a household's benefits due to the addition of a new household member who is
not a member of another certified household, or due to a decrease of $50 or
more in a household's gross monthly income, the social services district must
make the change effective no later than the first allotment issued 10 days
after the date the change was reported to the social services district. In no
event can the changes take effect any later than the month following the month
in which the change is reported.

(iii) All changes, which result in an
increase in a household' s benefits, shall be verified according to the
requirements set forth in this Part prior to taking action on these changes.
The household shall be allowed 10 days from the date the change is reported to
provide the required verification. The time frames for issuing the benefit
shall run from the date the change was reported, not from the date of
verification. Should the household fail to provide the required verification
within 10 days after the change is reported but does provide verification at a
later date, then the time frames shall run from the date verification is
provided rather than from the date the change is reported. When the local
department fails to take action on a change which increases a household's
benefit within the time limits specified above, all lost benefits shall be
restored to the household.

(iv) The
local department shall act upon changes that decrease a household's benefit
level or make a household ineligible to participate in the food stamp program
no later than the allotment for the month following the month in which the
notice of adverse action period has expired, provided a fair hearing and
continuation of benefits have not been requested. Verification of changes that
decrease benefit levels must be obtained prior to recertification except as
specified for cases subject to six-month reporting rules in subdivision (d) of
this section.

(v) Local departments
shall file a claim against these households in accordance with section
387.19 of this Part which received
benefits to which they were not entitled because the household failed to report
a required change in circumstances as detailed above. If the discovery is made
within the certification period, the household is entitled to a notice of
adverse action if the household's benefits are reduced.

(7) Changes in medical expenses discovered
from a source other than the household and which require contact with the
household for verification purposes must not be acted upon until the household
voluntarily reports the change or is recertified.

(f) Recertification. Timely
application/recertification must be completed and the household notified of
approval or denial prior to the end of the household's current certification
period. Eligible households must have an opportunity to participate in the food
stamp program by the household's normal issuance cycle in the month following
receipt of a timely application/ recertification form. No food stamp benefits
will be continued to a household beyond the end of the certification period
unless the household has been recertified. The processing requirements for
public assistance cases in receipt of food stamps, as set forth in section
387.5 of this Part will also apply
at the time of recertification. Except as otherwise limited by section
387.14(a)(4)(iii)
of this Part, for households in which all members are recipients of ADC and/or
SSI, categorical eligibility for food stamps must be assumed in the absence of
a timely redetermination of eligibility for such benefits; or granted if the
conditions set forth in section
387.14(a)(4) of
this Part are present at recertification.
(1)
Local departments will send the households the expiration notice in a manner
that will ensure receipt no earlier than the first day of the second to the
last month of the certification period and no later than the first day of the
household's last month of certification. However, households initially
certified for one or two months will receive their notice of expiration at the
time of certification.

(2)
Households which submit a recertification application to a local department by
the 15th day of the final month of certification will be considered to have
made a timely recertification application. Households receiving the notice of
expiration at the time of certification will have 15 days from the date of the
notice to file a timely recertification application. The recipient must be
interviewed and must submit all verification prior to the end of the final
month of the certificate period to be entitled to uninterrupted benefits. The
household must be allowed at least 10 days from the date of the interview to
submit any required verification that was not submitted during the interview.
Any household not determined eligible in sufficient time to permit
uninterrupted benefits due to the 10-day period for submission of additional
verification, will, if eligible, receive a full month's benefit within five
working days after supplying the missing verification.

(3) The local department must promptly act on
all timely recertification applications so as to ensure delivery of
uninterrupted food stamp benefits to eligible households. Households receiving
expiration notices can not be required to appear for an interview prior to the
last month of their current certification periods. If the household fails to
appear for a scheduled interview, fails to file the recertification application
prior to the required time period or fails to provide missing verification by
the end of the 10-day time period referred to in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision, the local department must deny the recertification
application.

(g)

(1) The Federal or State government may
initiate certain mass changes. Mass changes may include, but are not limited
to, adjustments to the income eligibility standards, the shelter and dependent
care deductions, the thrifty food plan and the standard deduction; annual and
seasonal adjustments to social security, SSI and other Federal benefits;
adjustments to public assistance and other changes in the eligibility criteria
based on legislative or regulatory actions shall be made in accordance with the
following:
(i) Adjustments to eligibility
standards, allotments, deductions and utility standards shall be effective for
all households at the same time.

(ii) Adjustments to food stamp benefits shall
be effective in the same month as a change in public assistance payments unless
there is less than 30 days' notice of the change. In which event, the change
shall be effective not later than the month following the change.

(2) A notice of adverse action is
not required for mass changes due to changes in public assistance. However,
notice of the change must be sent to all households prior to the change being
put into effect. If a household requests a fair hearing, benefits must be
continued at the former level only if the issue being appealed is that food
stamp eligibility or benefit were improperly computed or that Federal law or
regulation is being misapplied or misinterpreted by the department or by the
social services agency.

(3) Mass
changes in Federal benefits such as social security or SSI shall be
automatically adjusted by the local department for purposes of calculating the
household's benefit level. The household shall not be responsible for reporting
these changes.

Notes

N.Y. Comp.
Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18
§
387.17

Amended
New
York State Register June 9, 2021/Volume XLIII, Issue 23, eff.
6/9/2021

State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release.
More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

No prior version found.

State Regulations Toolbox
