DATE: October 31, 2025

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS Letter No.:25-20
ALL COUNTY WELFARE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
ALL COUNTY MEDI-CAL PROGRAM SPECIALISTS/LIAISONS
ALL COUNTY HEALTH EXECUTIVES
ALL COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH DIRECTORS
ALL COUNTY MEDS LIAISONS

SUBJECT: RESUMPTION OF ASSET VERIFICATION PROGRAM OPERATIONS
DUE TO ASSET LIMIT REINSTATEMENT
(References: All County Welfare Directors Letter (ACWDL) 25-14, 25-09,
23-29, 22-33, 22-13E, 22-12, 21-24, 21-23, 21-12, 19-17E, 17-37, 17-26E,
and Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter (MEDIL) I 22-49, I 21-
42, I 21-03, I 17-05)

Purpose

The purpose of this All County Welfare Directors Letter (ACWDL) is to inform counties
that Asset Verification Program (AVP) operations will resume due to the reinstatement
of asset limits for all Long-Term Care (LTC) and non-LTC Aged, Blind, and Disabled
(ABD) applicants, members, and their responsible relatives (RRs) effective January 1,
2026. This ACWDL consolidates previous DHCS guidance on AVP and reminds
counties of actions to be taken when determining eligibility for Non-MAGI Medi-Cal
cases requiring an asset test at application, change in circumstance (CIC), and annual
renewal.

Authority

Federal law (42 United States Code Section 1396w [Section 1940 of the Federal Social
Security Act]) requires California’s Medicaid program, Medi-Cal, to maintain an
electronic AVP to detect unreported assets for applicants, members, and their RRs.
Welfare & Institutions Code (WIC) Section 14013.5 outlines the requirements of
California’s AVP.

Background

DHCS conducted a test pilot program from January 2017 through March 2017. As
outlined in MEDIL I 17-05 and ACWDL 17-37, the pilot aimed to assess a new AVP and
its ability to identify undisclosed assets that may exceed property reserve limits. The
success of the pilot program resulted in a phased rollout, beginning with monthly AVP
reports for LTC annual redeterminations, and gradually increasing scope to include

California Department of Health Care Services State of California
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Gavin Newsom, Governor
1501 Capitol Avenue | Sacramento, CA | 95899-7413
MS 4607 | Phone (916) 552-9200 | www.dhcs.ca.gov California Health and Human Services Agency

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 2
October 31, 2025

reports for all ABD annual redeterminations. This expansion occurred alongside report
automation and request functionality programming in the Medi-Cal Eligibility Data
System (MEDS) and the Statewide Automated Welfare System (SAWS) allowing
County Eligibility Workers (CEWs) to order AVP for applications, CIC, and RR requests.

In 2021, several health measures were consolidated in Assembly Bill (AB) 133 as part
of the Health Omnibus Bill of 2021-2022. AB 133 added section 14005.62 to the
Welfare and Institutions Code (WIC), which established a two-phased approach to
eliminating the asset limits for Non-MAGI Medi-Cal programs:

• Phase I: Increased the asset limits to $130,000 person and $65,000 for each
additional household member (up to a maximum of 10 people) effective July 1,
2022.
• Phase II: Eliminated the asset limits for all Non-MAGI programs, effective
January 1, 2024.
o In accordance with ACWDL 23-29, AVP is used only to determine whether
ABD applicants or members seeking coverage for LTC transferred assets
for less than fair market value during the federally-mandated five-year
lookback period. Starting with applications and renewals dated on or
after January 1, 2026, CEWs must resume normal business
processes as outlined in this ACWDL.

The 2025-2026 Health Omnibus Bill, AB 116, amends section 14005.62 of the Welfare
and Institutions Code (WIC) to remove the subdivision which had eliminated the asset
limits for all Non-MAGI programs, and reenacts sections of the WIC to reinstate the
consideration of resources, including property and other assets, when making Medi-Cal
eligibility determinations, no sooner than January 1, 2026. An asset test will be required
for all impacted Non-MAGI programs, including the Medicare Savings Programs (MSP)
and LTC programs, at application, CIC, and annual renewal. The Pickle, Disabled Adult
Child (DAC), and Disabled Widow/er (DW) programs are under separate federal waiver
authority and are currently exempt from the new requirements.

Changes to AVP Review Requirements at Application, and Change in
Circumstance, and Annual Renewal Effective January 1, 2026

Effective January 1, 2026, the asset limit will be reinstated and set to $130,000 for one
person and $65,000 for each additional person (up to 10 maximum). CEWs must follow
the modified asset verification review requirements at application, CIC, and annual
renewal below.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 3
October 31, 2025

I: Application and Change in Circumstance

Weekly Batch Process/AVP Requests Submitted by CEWs

Each week, CEWs will submit AVP requests for applications, reported and unreported
CIC1, and RR searches in the MEDS2 or the SAWS by 5pm PT each Friday. For RRs
who are not applying for coverage and are not known to MEDS, CEWs must submit
requests through a manual process by 5pm PT each Wednesday. DHCS will distribute
updated instructions on submitting non-applying RR requests to counties via CWDA
following the publication of this ACWDL.

Submitted requests, including non-applying RRs, are compiled by DHCS on Friday
evening and are sent to LexisNexis for processing on Monday morning. Requests in this
batch cycle are processed at a volume of about 6,000 per week.

Request Rejections
Requests that could not be sent to LexisNexis due to an invalid SSN or address will be
returned to CEWs the following week for revision and resubmission. If CEWs do not
receive a rejection email, then it indicates that there were no rejections for that week.

For successful AVP requests, LexisNexis returns the response file to DHCS within 12-
14 calendar days. DHCS will distribute the response file to CalSAWS 1-3 business days
later.

Below is a visualization of the weekly batch process and timeline:

Batch Target AVP Requests Timeline
Process Population(s) Submitted By
Weekly Applications, CEWs via Request file Response Response
Change in MEDS or picked up file file received
Circumstance, SAWS by 5pm and received by CEWs via
and PT each Friday submitted by DHCS SAWS 1-3
Responsible (manual) by vendor within 12- business
Relative each 14 days later
Searches Monday calendar
days

1
Counties shall not send out a Medi-Cal Request for Information form (MC 355)
requesting asset information for reported changes unrelated to assets.
22 ACWDL
ACWDL 21-2421-24 and
and MEDIL MEDIL
I 21-42 provideI guidance
21-42 on provide guidance
how to submit on how
AVP requests in
MEDS with expectations for appropriate use.
to submit AVP requests in MEDS with expectations for
appropriate use.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 4
October 31, 2025

Reminders and Useful Tips for Submitting AVP Requests

Constraints
• AVP cannot be ordered in SAWS or MEDS for individuals with no SSN,
pseudo SSN, or SSN that has not yet been verified in MEDS. For ABD
applicants and RRs with no SSN or pseudo SSN, CEWs must request
administrative verification of all assets.
• Determine whether RRs not known to MEDS are applying for benefits. If
applying, wait for the SSN to be verified in MEDS before requesting AVP
electronically. If not applying, utilize the manual process.

Lookback Period
• Both MEDS and SAWS have lookback indicator functionality, allowing CEWs
to differentiate between LTC and non-LTC AVP requests. Marking the LTC
indicator in either system will result in a request for asset information with a
60-month lookback period, while marking the non-LTC indicator will result in a
90-day lookback period.
• The lookback period is calculated based on the date the request is submitted
to the vendor, not when it is submitted in MEDS or SAWS.

Request Tracking
• There is no mechanism to prevent the request of asset verification inquiries
for non-ABD individuals.
• Improperly submitted requests will result in additional costs to DHCS and
unnecessary response data returning to the county. Therefore, CEWs must
carefully track AVP request submissions and remain mindful of the
demographics subject to AVP reporting requirements.

Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA)
• Consumer information obtained via the asset verification reports is protected
under the provisions of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The presence
of an AVP response will subject the case to the FCRA requirements as set
forth in ACWDL 21-23.

Data Longevity
• All data received from the AVP reports are valid for 90 days. CEWs must
consider attested values and the timeliness of AVP response when

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 5
October 31, 2025

adjudicating eligibility. Please refer to the section “Use of Self-Attestation and
Reasonable Compatibility for Non-MAGI Eligibility Determinations” and
“Determining Counts,” below, for more information.

II: Annual Renewal

Monthly Batch Process/Requests Submitted by DHCS

After MEDS renewal, DHCS compiles AVP requests for all ABD LTC and Non-LTC
Medi-Cal members with an upcoming annual renewal. Annual renewal requests are
submitted two months prior to their redetermination date in MEDS (for example,
members with a redetermination due in June 2026 will have their AVP requests
submitted in April 2026).

LexisNexis picks up the request file between the 1st and 5th of each month and returns
the response file to DHCS within 12-14 calendar days. DHCS will distribute the
response file to CalSAWS 1-3 business days later.

Below is a visualization of the monthly batch process and timeline:

Batch Target AVP Requests Timeline
Process Population(s) Submitted By
Monthly Annual DHCS after Request file Response Response
Renewals MEDS renewal picked up file file received
(automatic) and received by CEWs via
submitted by DHCS SAWS 1-3
by vendor on or business
between 1st before the days later
and 5th of 15th of
each month each
month
N/a Response file (spreadsheet format)
received by participating counties after
the 20th of each month

IMPORTANT: DHCS will transmit annual renewal AVP request files in November and
December 2025 to ensure AVP results are available prior to the mailing of renewal
packets for the January and February 2026 renewal populations. These early
transmissions are necessary to ensure counties process annual renewals in compliance
with the reinstated asset limit requirements effective January 1, 2026. For these two
renewal months, the AVP results will be viewable exclusively in MEDS via the Financial

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 6
October 31, 2025

Institution, Real Property, Aircraft, and Watercraft screens. For more information about
these screens, please refer to MEDIL I 21-03. DHCS will also redistribute the MEDS
Manual update showing step-by-step instructions for accessing these screens to CWDA
and/or county AVP contact(s). DHCS and CalSAWS are working together to re-
establish the annual renewal batch process, with work efforts currently underway to
validate timelines, system readiness, and data accuracy. AVP reports for applications,
CIC, and RR searches (weekly batch process) are already available for use in SAWS
and MEDS.

Use of Self-Attestation and Reasonable Compatibility for Non-MAGI Eligibility
Determinations

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) permit the use of attested
information that is “reasonably compatible” with electronic data sources to streamline
Non-MAGI eligibility determinations. 3 Self-attestation by an individual, or attestation by
the individual’s household, family member, or authorized representative, is unverified
information collected during the application process. CEWs must determine whether
attested values are reasonably compatible with electronic data sources, such as the
asset verification reports. If both the attested value and the electronic data are at or
below the asset limits, they are considered reasonably compatible. CEWs must rely on
attested asset information provided during the application process, wherever possible,
and subsequently verify that information using the AVP reports pre or post Medi-Cal
enrollment as stipulated in 42 CFR § 435.945.

For applicants and RRs without an SSN, CEWs must accept self-attestation and
administratively verify the information provided, if applicable. As the use of attested
values can expedite the provision of care, CEWs should facilitate use of the SAWS2
Plus in lieu of the Single Streamlined Application (SSApp) for applicants with a property
component to their eligibility determination wherever possible.

To be accepted within the context of California’s AVP, attestation must include:
• The minimum necessary information for all asset types listed in MEDIL I 22-49
(defined as “complete attestation”); and/or,
• An attested absence of asset(s). For example:
o Client states they do not have any assets during intake; or,

3 See, Streamlined Eligibility and Enrollment for Non-MAGI Populations, p. 16.
https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-center/mac-learning-collaboratives/
downloads/non-magi-populations.pdf.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 7
October 31, 2025

o Client states they do not have any assets under penalty of perjury 4.

As of January 1, 2026, CEWs must grant Medi-Cal eligibility for all LTC and non-LTC
ABD applicants and their RRs if:

• The attested asset information and/or information found on electronic verification
sources are at, or under $130,000 for one person and $65,000 for each
additional person (up to 10 maximum).

A complete attestation (and/or the attested absence of asset(s)) is needed to approve
eligibility using this method. However, attestation cannot be accepted for trusts
(including special needs trusts), annuities, and Spousal Impoverishment (SI) cases. For
these scenarios, CEWs must continue to obtain administrative verification and follow
standard eligibility approval procedures.

Attested values can be used to expedite the approval of Medi-Cal, but they cannot be
used to maintain benefits in the absence of AVP reports or administrative verification. If
eligibility is approved based on attested values, please refer to Member/CIC Scenarios
#1-3 on pages 11-13 for actions to be taken based on the timely receipt or non-receipt
of the AVP report.

Ex-Parte Processing

Consistent with federal and state policy, counties must conduct ex-parte reviews at the
start of processing an application, CIC, or annual redetermination for Medi-Cal. This
process allows CEWs to use existing case information, AVP results, and other
electronic data sources to complete eligibility determinations without contacting the
individual, provided all necessary information is available and the case meets
reasonable compatibility standards. Ex-parte processing helps minimize delays, reduce
administrative burden, and ensure uninterrupted access to coverage for eligible
individuals.

CMS previously granted DHCS Section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver flexibilities for use in ex-
parte eligibility determinations and redeterminations during the Public Health
Emergency (PHE) and Continuous Coverage Unwinding Period. The following waiver
flexibilities, once used for AVP, were sunset as of June 30, 2025:

4 See, ACWDL 21-12 for affidavits signed under penalty of perjury; See, ACWDL 19-17E
4
forSee, ACWDL
telephonic 21-12 for
and electronic affidavits
signature signed for
requirements under penalty of perjury; See,
affidavits.
ACWDL 19-17E for telephonic and electronic signature requirements
4 See,
for ACWDL 21-12 for affidavits signed under penalty of perjury; See,
affidavits.
ACWDL 19-17E for telephonic and electronic signature requirements

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 8
October 31, 2025

1. Renew Medi-Cal eligibility without regard to the asset test for Non-MAGI
members subject to an asset test (prior to January 1, 2024).
2. Renew Medi-Cal for individuals for whom Asset Verification data is not returned
or returned within a reasonable timeframe
Due to the sunsetting of Section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver flexibilities, the application, CIC,
and annual renewal scenarios as presented in ACWDL 22-13E are obsolete. Please
refer to the scenarios below for the most up-to-date information.

However, despite the sunset of waiver flexibilities, DHCS will continue to maintain the
reasonable timeframe counts for AVP reports established in MEDIL I 22-20E to simplify
the ex-parte process and provide counties with a deadline for when administrative
verification must be requested due to the non-receipt or untimely receipt of AVP reports.

Determining Counts
• The 20- calendar day reasonable timeframe count applies to applications, CIC,
and RR searches (weekly batch process) and must begin on the Monday after
counties request the AVP report in MEDS or SAWS.
• The 30- calendar day reasonable timeframe count applies to annual renewals
(monthly batch process) and must begin on the 5th of each month.
• If either the Monday or the 5th of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, CEWs
must begin the reasonable timeframe count on the following business day.

Application and CIC scenarios and actions CEWs must take to determine or
redetermine eligibility for Non-MAGI Medi-Cal programs requiring an asset test
(effective January 1, 2026):

Application Scenario Actions CEWs Must Take
• Complete Calculate property reserve using the most recent
attestation is values from the AVP report (do not document AVP
provided report values in the case file). For asset(s) not
1. detected by the AVP report, utilize attested or
• AVP report is
received within administratively verified values in the case file to
20- calendar day determine eligibility. If present, administratively
timeframe verified values should be used in lieu of attested
• (This scenario values.
assumes the
application is still Example 1: John attested to owning a Bank of
pending approval) America checking account with a $500 balance which
is documented in the case file, but the AVP report

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 9
October 31, 2025

Application Scenario Actions CEWs Must Take
N/a N/a does not detect the account. In this scenario, CEWs
would use the attested value of $500 when
calculating the property reserve.

Under limit: The attested and AVP report values are
reasonably compatible. Approve Medi-Cal eligibility
and do not request further verification of assets.

Over limit: The attested and AVP report values are
not reasonably compatible. Request administrative
verification of assets such as banking statements
and/or property valuation reports and follow normal
business processes to complete the eligibility
determination.

NOTE: Counties must follow Second Contact
requirements prior to denial at application to
obtain necessary verifications. Please refer to
Second Contact guidance reminders and
scenario examples in ACWDL 22-12.

• Complete Calculate property reserve using attested value(s).
attestation is
2. provided Under limit: Approve Medi-Cal eligibility and
• AVP report is not recalculate property reserve once AVP report is
received but still received. Refer to Member/CIC Scenarios #1-3 on
within 20- pages 11-13 for next steps to be taken.
calendar day
timeframe Over limit: Request administrative verification of
• (This scenario assets such as banking statements and/or property
assumes the valuation reports and recalculate the property reserve
application is still to determine eligibility.
pending approval)
NOTE: Counties must follow Second Contact
requirements prior to denial at application to
obtain necessary verifications. Please refer to
Second Contact guidance reminders and
scenario examples in ACWDL 22-12.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 10
October 31, 2025

Application Scenario Actions CEWs Must Take
• Complete Calculate property reserve using attested value(s).
attestation is
3. provided Under limit: Reasonable compatibility cannot be
• AVP report is not established. Request administrative verification of
received within assets, such as banking statements and/or property
20-calendar day valuation reports, and reconcile attested value(s) with
timeframe administratively verified values to determine eligibility.
• (This scenario Document in the case file that ex-parte review was
assumes the unsuccessful due to the non-receipt or untimely
application is still receipt of the AVP report.
pending approval)
Over limit: Request administrative verification of
assets such as banking statements and/or property
valuation reports and recalculate the property reserve
to determine eligibility. Document in the case file that
ex-parte review was unsuccessful due to the non-
receipt or untimely receipt of the AVP report.

NOTE: Counties must follow Second Contact
requirements prior to denial at application to
obtain necessary verifications. Please refer to
Second Contact guidance reminders and
scenario examples in ACWDL 22-12.

• No or incomplete Application is incomplete.
attestation A determination of eligibility cannot be made until
4. provided complete attestation is obtained. Request the MC 604
• AVP report is not IPS and other supplemental forms necessary for Non-
received but still MAGI eligibility determinations in accordance with
within 20- ACWDL 17-26E. CEWs can also obtain attestation
calendar day via writing, telephone or in-person interview.
timeframe
NOTE: Counties must follow Second Contact
requirements prior to denial at application to
obtain necessary verifications. Please refer to
Second Contact guidance reminders and
scenario examples in ACWDL 22-12.

If/when a complete attestation is obtained, please
follow Application Scenario # 1 or 2 above.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 11
October 31, 2025

Application Scenario Actions CEWs Must Take
N/a N/a N/a
• No or incomplete Application is incomplete.
attestation A determination of eligibility cannot be made until
5. provided complete attestation is obtained. Request the MC 604
• AVP report is not IPS and other supplemental forms necessary for Non-
received within MAGI eligibility determinations in accordance with
20- calendar-day ACWDL 17-26E. CEWs can also obtain attestation
timeframe via writing, telephone, or in-person interview.

NOTE: Counties must follow Second Contact
requirements prior to denial at application to
obtain necessary verifications. Please refer to
Second Contact guidance reminders and
scenario examples in ACWDL 22-12.

If/when a complete attestation is obtained, please
follow Scenario # 3 above.

Member/CIC Scenario* Actions CEWs Must Take
• Eligibility was Recalculate property reserve using the most recent
1. approved based values from the AVP report (do not document AVP
on complete report values in the case file) and information known
attestation in the case file for asset(s) not detected by the AVP
• AVP report is report. Values for asset(s) not detected by the AVP
received within report can include attested or administratively verified
20- calendar day values. If present, administratively verified values
timeframe should be used in lieu of attested values.

Example 1: Jennifer attested to owning a checking
account at Golden 1 Credit Union with a $500
Note: This scenario is a balance, which is documented in the case file. She
continuation of was approved for Medi-Cal based on attested values,
Application Scenario #2. but the AVP report does not detect the Golden 1
checking account when it returns. In this scenario,
CEWs would use the attested value of $500 when
recalculating the property reserve.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 12
October 31, 2025

Member/CIC Scenario* Actions CEWs Must Take
N/a N/a Example 2: Ernesto was approved for Medi-Cal
based on attested values and a previously verified
Mechanics Bank trust account valued at $50,000. All
assets were documented in the case file,
but the AVP report does not detect the trust account
when it returns. In this scenario, CEWs would use the
administratively verified value of $50,000 when
recalculating the property reserve if the verification is
90 or less days old (new trust documentation must be
requested if over 90 days old).

Under limit: The attested and AVP report values are
reasonably compatible. Maintain Medi-Cal eligibility
and do not request further verification of assets
(including closed accounts and those not detected by
the AVP report).

Over limit: The attested and AVP report values are
not reasonably compatible. Request administrative
verification of all assets, including closed accounts
and those asset(s) not detected by the AVP report,
with banking statements and/or property valuation
reports. Redetermine eligibility in accordance with 42
CFR § 435.916(d) and W&I Section 14005.37.

• Eligibility was Maintain Medi-Cal eligibility. If AVP report is received,
2. approved based recalculate property reserve and take action in
on complete accordance with Member/CIC Scenario #1. If AVP
attestation report is not received, take action in accordance with
• AVP report is not Member/CIC Scenario #3.
received but still
within 20-
calendar day
timeframe

Note: This scenario is a
continuation of
Application Scenario #2.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 13
October 31, 2025

Member/CIC Scenario* Actions CEWs Must Take
• Eligibility was If after the 30-day period following the mailing of the
3. approved based MC 355 and the second attempted contact, the
on complete member does not provide the administrative
attestation verification of assets requested, the county shall send
• AVP report is not a timely 10-day NOA explaining the reason for
received within discontinuance from Medi-Cal.
20- calendar day
timeframe

Note: This scenario is a
continuation of
Application Scenario #2.

• Member reports a Recalculate property reserve using the most recent
4. CIC or values from the AVP report (do not document AVP
• There is an report values in the case file) and information known
unreported CIC in the case file for asset(s) not detected by the AVP
(e.g., client turns report. Values for asset(s) not detected by the AVP
65 and is being report can include attested or administratively verified
evaluated for values. If present, administratively verified values
Non-MAGI Medi- should be used in lieu of attested values.
Cal)
• AVP report is Example 1: At application, Nathan attested to owning
received within a checking account at Umpqua Bank with a $500
20- calendar day balance. During the initial run, the AVP report
timeframe detected the Umpqua Bank account but because his
attestation was reasonably compatible with the AVP
report, the $500 value was documented in the case
file.
AVP is run after Nathan reports a CIC, and it
does not detect the Umpqua Bank account. In
this scenario, CEWs would use the attested
value of $500 when recalculating the property
reserve.

Example 2: Sharice turned 65 and is being evaluated
for Non-MAGI Medi-Cal. As part of her evaluation,
she provides administrative verification of a Wells

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 14
October 31, 2025

Member/CIC Scenario* Actions CEWs Must Take
N/a N/a Fargo trust account valued at $50,000. The AVP
report does not detect the Wells Fargo trust when it
returns. In this scenario, CEWs would use the
administratively verified value of $50,000 when
recalculating the property reserve if the verification is
90 or less days old (new trust documentation must be
requested if over 90 days old).

Under limit: The case file and AVP report values are
reasonably compatible. Maintain Medi-Cal eligibility
and do not request further verification of assets
(including closed accounts and those not detected by
the AVP report).

Over limit: The case file and AVP report values are
not reasonably compatible. Request administrative
verification of all assets, including closed accounts
and those assets not detected by the AVP report, with
banking statements and/or property valuation reports.
Recalculate property reserve using the most recent
combined value of all assets provided on all
administrative verification documents, including those
asset(s) previously disclosed but not returned by the
AVP report.

NOTE: Counties must follow ACWDL 22-33
requirements to obtain necessary verifications
at CIC and discontinue when necessary
information is not received.

• Member reports a If after the 30-day period following the mailing of the
5. CIC or MC 355 and the second attempted contact, the
• There is an member does not provide the administrative
unreported CIC verification of assets requested, the county shall send
(e.g., client turns a timely 10-day NOA explaining the reason for
65 and is being discontinuance from Medi-Cal.
evaluated for
Non-MAGI Medi-
Cal)

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 15
October 31, 2025

Member/CIC Scenario* Actions CEWs Must Take
N/a N/a
• AVP report is not
received within
20- calendar day
timeframe

*This section does not apply to members with an upcoming annual redetermination.
Actions to be taken for annual renewals can be found in the Annual Renewal Scenario
table below.

Annual Renewal scenarios and actions CEWs must take to redetermine eligibility
for Non-MAGI Medi-Cal programs requiring an asset test (effective January 1,
2026):

Annual Renewal Scenario Actions CEWs Must Take
• AVP report is Calculate property reserve using the most recent
1. received within values from the AVP report (do not document AVP
30-calendar day report values in the case file) and information known
timeframe in the case file for asset(s) not detected by AVP.
Values for asset(s) not detected by AVP can include
attested or administratively verified values. If
present, administratively verified values should be
used in lieu of attested values.

Example 1: At application, Thomas was approved
based on attested values which were reasonably
compatible with the AVP report. All attested values
were documented in the case file, including a
Golden 1 Credit Union checking account valued at
$500.
When AVP was run at annual renewal, it did
not detect the Golden 1 checking account. In
this scenario, CEWs would use the attested
value of $500 when calculating the property
reserve.

Example 2: At application, Julia was approved based
on attested values, but when AVP returned the
attested values were not reasonably compatible with
the AVP report. After requesting administrative

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 16
October 31, 2025

Annual Renewal Scenario Actions CEWs Must Take
N/a N/a verification of all assets, Julia was found to be under
limits and eligibility was maintained. All of the
administratively verified assets were documented in
the case file, and one of these was a Redwood
Credit Union savings account with a $5,000 balance.
When AVP was run at annual renewal, it did
not detect the Redwood Credit Union savings
account. In this scenario, CEWs would use
the previously verified value of $5,000 when
calculating the property reserve.

Under limit: The case file and AVP report values
are reasonably compatible. Maintain Medi-Cal
eligibility and do not request further verification of
assets (including closed accounts and those not
detected by AVP).

Over limit: The case file and AVP report values are
not reasonably compatible. Request administrative
verification of all assets, including closed accounts
and those not detected by AVP, with banking
statements and/or property valuation reports.
Recalculate property reserve using the most recent
combined value of all assets provided on
administrative verification documents, including
assets previously disclosed but not returned by the
AVP report.

NOTE: Counties must follow ACWDL 22-33
requirements to obtain necessary verifications
at annual renewal and discontinue when
necessary information is not received.

• AVP report is not If after the 30-day period following the mailing of the
2. received within MC 355 and the second attempted contact, the
30-calendar day member does not provide the administrative
timeframe verification of assets requested, the county shall
send a timely 10-day NOA explaining the reason for
discontinuance from Medi-Cal.

Letter No.: 25-20
Page 17
October 31, 2025

Reminders and Best Practices

CEWs must not request AVP reports to assist in eligibility determinations for other
welfare programs, such as CalWORKS or CalFresh. In cases where individuals are
applying for or dually enrolled in Medi-Cal and CalWORKS or CalFresh, counties are to
use the AVP reports solely to determine or redetermine Medi-Cal eligibility. In addition,
CEWs must not request AVP reports for MAGI Medi-Cal cases, except when members
transition from MAGI to Non-MAGI Medi-Cal. To ensure access to and continuity of
care, CEWs must assist clients in obtaining administrative verification of assets
whenever needed.

Documentation of Attested Values

CEWs should document only attested values and values obtained through
administrative verification in the case file (as a reminder, AVP report values must not be
documented in the case file). If a client is over limits or AVP is not received timely,
attested values should be updated with administratively verified values.

Documentation of Closed Assets

If the AVP report provides evidence that a previously known asset has been closed,
then the CEW should remove that asset in the case record. If the record is known in
SAWS, then the case should be updated to reflect that the asset is closed by using the
AVP report to end date the asset listing.

All supporting information and/or documentation used in eligibility determinations must
be retained in the case notes/files to be compliant with audits and appeals
requirements. This may include person(s) contacted, dates, times, and other applicable
information or documentation to support the case file.

If you have any questions, or if we can provide further information, please contact the
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division (MCED) Policy Inbox at MCED-Policy@dhcs.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Sarah Crow, Chief
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division
