Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

Customers

Services by Division

Family & Community Services

Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled (AABD)

What is the purpose of this service?

The Aid to the Aged, Blind, or Disabled (AABD) cash assistance program is available through the Illinois Department of Human Services.

Who can receive these services?

The program is for persons who are aged, blind, or disabled and who need money. A person may be eligible for AABD if they:

Receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or are ineligible for SSI due to income or are ineligible for SSI due to expiration of federal time limit on assistance to certain immigrants who have not yet become U.S. citizens.

Are a U.S. citizen or meet certain requirements for noncitizens

Live in Illinois

Are 65 years or older, blind, or disabled

When determining eligibility for AABD, the Department exempts certain assets up to a specific dollar amount. The Department also exempts:

Burial space, such as crypt, casket, vault, marker, lot, or opening/closing the grave

Certain funds and prearranged plans for burial, cremation, or funeral expenses

The Department of Human Services has the legal right to recover the amount of assistance a person receives through the AABD program.

What services are offered?

A person who is eligible for AABD receives cash and medical assistance. They may also be eligible for SNAP benefits.

How to apply?

See Apply For SNAP, Cash, Medical Assistance to apply for AABD benefits.

More Information & Resources

Use the DHS Office Locator to find your local Family Community Resource Center.

Contact the DHS Help Line at (800) 843-6154 or (866) 324-5553 (TTY).

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
