Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 07: Assets

PM 07-02-00: Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled (AABD)

PM 07-02-22: Community Spouse Resource Allowance

WAG 07-02-22

The Community Spouse Resource Allowance (CSRA) applies to all long term care (LTC) customers with a community spouse. LTC customers include those living in nursing homes (NH) or supporting living programs (SLP) and those applying for or receiving Department on Aging (DoA) Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) waiver services.

The CSRA is the portion of total non-exempt resources owned by the LTC spouse, the community spouse, or jointly by both, which may be transferred to the community spouse. The CSRA must be directly available to the community spouse or another person for the sole benefit of the community spouse. The CSRA, up to $143,172.00, is not considered available to pay for the care of the LTC spouse for applications received on or after 01/01/2026. This amount also applies at the first redetermination when determining whether the CSRA was transferred by the customer or their representative indicated at intake. After subtracting the CSRA from the total non-exempt resources of the LTC spouse and the community spouse, the remainder is available to pay for the care of the LTC spouse. The previous amounts can be found at the WAG 25-03-02 (2) Medical Standards.

The LTC spouse is not required to transfer resources to the community spouse. However, if the LTC spouse chooses to transfer their resources, they are only allowed to do so until the first redetermination after initial approval of medical benefits. Verify whether the transfer was completed by the first redetermination following that year. If the LTC spouse has not transferred the resources to the community spouse, the resources are considered available to the LTC spouse. Do not review the community spouse's resources at redetermination except to verify transfers for the CSRA. Verification of the CSRA transfer at first redetermination involves verifying the change in ownership of only the resources reported at intake unless there is evidence that one or both spouses failed to report resources at intake accurately. Resources acquired or transferred by the community spouse after initial determination are not subject to review.

Note: If the community spouse acquires a resource, such as an inheritance, after initial eligibility is determined, it does not affect the CSRA which was previously established, and the new resource is not available to the LTC spouse. If the LTC spouse receives a resource after eligibility is determined, it cannot be transferred to the community spouse even if the transfer would bring resources of the community spouse up to the maximum CSRA amount. If, after eligibility is determined, a resource is received by the couple (not legally owned by one or the other alone), half of the resource belongs to the community spouse, and the other half is available to the LTC spouse.

In addition to the CSRA amount, a customer can transfer personal effects, household goods, and one motor vehicle for the sole benefit of his or her spouse, regardless of their dollar value.

If the community spouse fails to disclose information about his or her resources or transferred resources, the customer is ineligible. Both the applicant and spouse must cooperate by providing information about resources owned by either or both spouses.

If the community spouse begins receiving DoA HCBS waiver services or becomes a resident of an NH or SLF, do not allow the CSRA. If the CSRA has already been determined but the ownership of the resources has not been changed, discontinue the transfer.

Notify each spouse of the amount of nonexempt resources available to the community spouse and the amount remaining to pay for care of the LTC spouse.

The amount allowed as the CSRA may exceed the resource allowance standard of $143,172.00 only in the following situations:

a court order establishes a different resource allowance; or

an appeal decision determines that the transfer of income-producing resources over the standard CSRA is needed to raise the community spouse's income to the maximum amount permitted as the Community Spouse Maintenance Needs Allowance (CSMNA) (see PM 15-04-04-a).

Appeal of Community Spouse Resource Allowance (CSRA)

The appeal decision bases the amount of an allowable increase in the CSRA on the cost of a single premium life annuity with fixed monthly payments. These payments equal the amount needed to raise the community spouse's income to the maximum amount permitted by the Community Spouse Maintenance Needs Allowance (CSMNA). See PM 15-04-04-a. Diversion of income from the client as the CSMNA is not considered in the appeal decision.

The appellant must provide a quote for the single premium life annuity cost from a company that offers annuities. If resources are less than the amount needed to buy the annuity, the appellant must provide a quote for the monthly annuity payments using available resources.

The appeal decision informs the Long Term Care Medical Field Offices (LTC MFO) of the amount to permit as the CSRA and of the amount of the fixed monthly annuity payments to treat as available to the community spouse, whether or not the annuity is purchased.

The actual purchase of the annuity is not required. Count the monthly amount the annuity would pay as available to the community spouse, starting with the month following the month the resources are transferred. The monthly amount the annuity would pay is fixed and does not change.

Links

PM 07-02-22-a: Delay in Transfer to Community Spouse

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
