Human Resources Administration311Search all NYC.gov websites

MenuServing New Yorkers with Care & Compassion

Text-Size

Search

Search

Search

SNAP & CAHousing & Prevention Services Health AssistanceOther Benefits & Services

SelectABAWDACCESS HRABenefit ReplacementCareer ServicesCash AssistanceChild Care ServicesEBT Card ServicesFood AssistanceSNAPWeCAREWelfare Fraud Prevention

ABAWD

ACCESS HRA

Benefit Replacement

Career Services

Cash Assistance

Child Care Services

EBT Card Services

Food Assistance

SNAP

WeCARE

Welfare Fraud Prevention

Share

Print

SNAP Benefits Information

Get Started

If you’re new to SNAP, go to the SNAP guide for a simple explainer of the application process. You can also check if you might be eligible for SNAP benefits.

To apply for SNAP or manage your case, go to ACCESS HRA.

If you have a specific question about SNAP, go to the SNAP frequently asked questions page.

Important SNAP Notices

Expand AllCollapse All

Click a question or press the enter key on a question to reveal its answer.

ABAWD Work Requirement

On November 1, 2025, HRA was required to implement the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) eligibility requirements for Able Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD). ABAWD identified individuals will be required to comply with the ABAWD requirements beginning March 1, 2026.

Learn more about ABAWD work requirements.

SNAP Scams

EBT scams are common. Follow these tips to prevent thieves from stealing your SNAP benefits.

Freeze your EBT card using ebtEDGE. Only unfreeze it before you buy something, then freeze it again.

Check terminals in stores for credit card skimmers

Change your PIN and check your balance often

Don’t give out your EBT information over the phone

View the Protect Your Benefits - Skimming Flyer (FLY-1095) in:

English

Español

繁體中文

简体中文

Русский

العربية

Kreyòl Ayisyen

한국어

বাংলা

اردو | Polski

Français

Emergency Food Assistance

For information about emergency food program locations and hours of operation please use the interactive Food Help NYC Map or call 311. Agents are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

You can also download a list of NYC Food Pantries and Community Kitchens.

Want to work with HRA to provide food assistance? Find information on how to become a Community Food (CFC) Connection Provider.

Case Inquiries

HRA requires submitting a Client Consent Form to verify a client's consent before releasing case information to a third party.

Applicant rights

You have the right to ask for an application for SNAP benefits. This office must accept the application as long as the application is signed and has a readable name (and address if you have one).

You have the right to apply for SNAP benefits online at nyc.gov/accesshra, in person, by mail, or through an authorized representative. Once you've submitted your application or recertification for SNAP benefits, you must have an interview. Please find SNAP interview instructions here.

If all members of your household are currently receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or plan to apply for SSI, you may apply for SNAP Benefits at the Social Security Office instead of turning in your recertification form at the SNAP office.

More SNAP Resources

SNAP Need to Know Brochure

SNAP Work Requirements Flyer:

English

Español

繁體中文

简体中文

Русский

العربية

Kreyòl Ayisyen

한국어

বাংলা

اردو

Polski

Français

Shqip

Italiano

ייִדיש

Read the SNAP Nondiscrimination Statement
