The Application for Benefits Eligibility

The ABE Partner Portal
An Introduction for Long Term
Care Providers
Illinois Department of Healthcare & Family Services (HFS)
Illinois Department of Human Services (DHS) 1
February 2020

Agenda

• This Presentation will review:

1. The ABE Partner Portal and New Long Term Care
Provider function in ABE
2. Creating a Partner Portal Account
3. Logging in to the Partner Portal and Uploading
Documents
4. Primary ASA Tasks and Responsibilities

2

SECTION I
THE ABE PARTNER PORTAL and Long Term Care

3

The Integrated Eligibility System(IES) and ABE:
The Customer, Partner and Worker Facing Portals

ABE IES
Customer Portal Caseworker Portal
Partner Portal

Information that customers and Providers
enter in ABE applications and Manage My
Case (MMC), pre-populates the
caseworker’s Data Collection pages in IES.

Important customer information like notices
and other benefits details are sent from IES
to ABE MMC.

4

ABE and the Partner Portal

• ABE, the Application for Benefits Eligibility, is the State of Illinois’ web-based
portal for applying for, accessing and managing health coverage, SNAP and
cash benefits, and the Medicare Savings Program (MSP). As Approved
Representatives and/or Community Partners you have been using ABE to
apply for benefits and receive notices through the Customer Portal.

• The ABE Partner Portal allows certain Medicaid Providers the ability to
complete specific tasks or functions.

• Authorized Long Term Care providers through their Partner Portal account
can securely submit necessary documentation to the State on changes in
income, resources and TPL, as well as redeterminations or other relevant
documents through ABE.

• Following this training, if you should encounter problems using ABE, please
contact your organization’s ABE Agency Security Administrator(ASAs). More 5
about ASAs in a minute!

Partner Portal Registration Requirements
• Your organization/agency/hospital (these terms are used interchangeably
and refer to both one facility agencies and organizations that include
multiple facilities) must have a Medicaid Provider ID number. You will need
this number to register in the Portal. For information on how to register as a
Medicaid provider visit hfs.illinois.gov and click on Medical Provider’s –
IMPACT Provider Enrollment.

• Each Agency must identify one employee who will act as the Primary
Agency Security Administrator (ASA) for the purpose of managing agency
staff that will use the ABE Partner Portal.

• Contractors may not be the Primary ASAs for a Provider however the LTC
Provider Primary ASA may designate someone at the contractual agency as
a secondary ASA.

• Prior to leaving the agency, the Primary ASA must submit a request to have
Partner Portal access deactivated and submit registration for a new Primary 6
ASA. Additional ASA Information in Section 4.

Navigating in ABE
Please review the following tips on navigating through ABE:
Do not use your Internet browser’s back, forward or stop buttons while in the
application. Use the buttons provided at the bottom of each page of the application:

Click the [Next] button when you are done with a page and
ready for the next questions.
Click the [Back] button if you need to go back to a page and need
to change your answers
You will see the [Exit] button after submitting your application.
Clicking this button will take you back to the home page.

Click the [Save and Exit] button to save the information already
entered and return to the application later.

• You must complete questions with a red star (*) next to them.
• Your ABE session will time-out after 30 minutes of inactivity. You will need to log-in
again to continue.

Section 2
Creating an ABE Partner Portal Account

Setting up your ABE Partner Portal Account
From the ABE Homepage (ABE.Illinois.gov), choose the ABE Partner
Login link. You will use this link each time you return to ABE. Do NOT
use the Login button in the upper right corner of the homepage.

9

Setting up an Account , cont’d

Click the, [Create a new ABE User ID and Password] link at the bottom of the
screen.

10

Section 1: User Information
• Enter information about yourself and your organization type. Email entered
should be your work email! This increases the security of your account and
DHS/HFS Data.

11

User Information, cont’d
Type of User:
• A regular user for a provider that is certified to upload documents (everyone).
• A designated Agency Security Administrator (ASA) for a Provider that is certified to
upload documents.
• The first ASA to register is considered the “Primary ASA” and will be responsible
for carrying out the ASA tasks and responsibilities.

12

Important Information!

As part of Partner Portal account creation you must check this box. Be careful to read and
understand this requirement.

This agreement and language is applicable for Provisional Eligibility
Coverage as well!
13

Section 2: Provider User ID and Password
Create a personal ABE
User ID and Password
that you will use to
login to ABE on an
ongoing basis. The It is important to write down the
secret questions and answers to your security questions
responses you choose and store them in a secure location.
will be used as a Passwords cannot be reset without
security check if you correct answers. If you are not able to
reset your password, you will need to
need to recover or go through the Account creation
change your password. process again. Accounts are “locked”
User IDs CANNOT be after 3 unsuccessful password
recovered. attempts. This lock last for 60
minutes.

You will be prompted
to change your ABE
password every 6
months. 14

Section 3: Organization Information
• Once you enter your ABE user type and create a User ID and Password, Section 3
will display.
• Enter your Organization’s State of Illinois Medicaid Provider ID Number. If you will
upload documents for multiple facilities, click [Add] and an additional Provider ID
box will display. You may do this as many times as needed to add all locations.
• Click [Submit] when you have added all numbers. If you do not know your HFS
Provider ID, contact your office administrator or billing office.

Tip: If you need to add multiple
Provider IDs because you work at
more than one location, add them
before entering your password and
security questions. As a security
measure, ABE wipes out these
responses when the page is refreshed. 15

Account Confirmation
Once all required fields are complete, click [Submit].

• If you are the Primary Agency Security Administrator, after creating your
account you must go to ABE ASA Request SharePoint and enter your ABE
account information as well as your organization’s information. Your ASA
request will be reviewed by the HFS business and security offices before
approval. You must be approved and granted access before you can
approve others in your organization to use the portal.
• All other users should submit the ABE Registration Form 1706P to the
organization’s Primary ASA for review and record keeping. The 1706P can be
found under the Medical Providers tab on the Medical Forms page under
Providers, labeled Application for Benefits Eligibility (ABE) (pdf) on the HFS
Website.
• After review, the Primary ASA will approve and grant Partner Portal access 16
to the remaining users.
• Once granted access users are ready to begin using the Partner Portal.

Knowledge Check:
• What does ABE stand for?

• Abraham Lincoln Benefits Exchange
• All Benefits Eligibility
• Application for Benefits Eligibility

• Can any Provider use the ABE Partner Portal?

• Can all documents be submitted in the Partner Portal?

• If I forget my User ID or password can the state reset my account?
17

Section 3
Logging in to the Partner Portal and Uploading
Documents

Logging In and Multi-Factor Authentication

You will use the ABE
Partner Login in the
middle of the page to
arrive at the correct
Partner Login screen.

19

Multifactor Authentication (MFA) Process
For security purposes, we are required to validate a user’s identity each time
they log-in to the ABE Partner Portal. ABE does this through a process called
multi-factor or two factor authentication.
E-mail Activation
• The first time you log into the ABE Partner Portal, you will be asked to
register your e-mail address. You must enter the e-mail address you used
when setting up your ABE User Partner Portal Account and one you can
access when working in the Partner Portal. Because of this additional
security measure, the email used should be your work email. Click
[Register].

20

Email Activation
An Activation Code will be sent to the e-mail address. Enter the code in the space provided
and click [Activate Email Address].
• If you do not receive the Activation Code, check your Junk or Spam folder. If the
Activation Code is not received after 10 minutes (it usually arrive within a minute),
click [Resend Activation Code] to generate a new code.
• You will only need to activate your e-mail address once (unless your email changes).
• If you no longer use or have access to the e-mail address associated with your ABE
User Profile, you will need to contact your Agency Security Administrator to have
your profile updated with your new e-mail address or you must set up a new ABE
User Account with a valid e-mail address.

21

Access Authentication
Once your e-mail is activated, an Access Code will be sent to that e-mail address.
Enter this code in the space provided. Click [Next] and the Provider Portal
Landing page displays.

ABE will send an Access Code to the registered, activated e-mail each time you
log into the ABE Partner Portal. The code must be entered on the Authentication
Access Code page to reach the Partner Portal Landing page.

22

Location Selection
• After completing Multifactor Authentication, if you entered multiple
Provider IDs in your user profile, the Location Selection page displays. If you
are associated with only one location, you will be taken directly to the ABE
Partner Portal Landing Page.

• On the Location Selection page, indicate the location where you are
working for this ABE session.

23

Provider Portal Landing Page
After logging in to the ABE Partner Portal, completing MFA, and choosing your
work location (if you have multiple locations) the Partner Portal Landing Page will
display.
Select, “Upload document for existing Health Coverage Applications or cases.”
Click [Next].
You will choose the “Manage My Account” selection if you need to update your
user profile including adding or changing a location, or changing an e-mail.

24

Uploading Documents
Enter the client’s Application or Case Number, Social Security Number or Recipient
Identification Number (RIN) and select the Transaction Type that the documents
relate. All mandatory questions must be answered to proceed. Click, [Next].

If you choose TPL or
Income as your Transaction
Type, you will then be asked
for the Transaction Audit
Number (TAN). When
submitting a 3654
document under Other
Proof include the admission
(TAN) when possible!

25

Finding the TAN
The TAN is an auto generated tracking number assigned to each and every
MEDI transaction; you need to submit the changes in MEDI first, in order to get
the TAN and upload the documents in the ABE Partner Portal. You can find this
number on the Summary Results page to the provider which tells the provider
if the submission was accepted successfully.

26

Proof Categories
• Review the various Proof Categories listed and examples for each category.
Click [Next]. The Submit Your Documents page will display; select the
category(s) of proof document you would like to submit. Click [Next]. Proof
Categories include:
• Proof of SSN Application
• Proof of Aged, Blind and Disability Assistance
• Proof of Disability
• Proof of Medicare
Remember - When
• Proof of Liquid Assets
submitting a 3654
• Proof of Other Assets
document under
• Proof of Employment Other Proof include
• Proof of Self Employment the admission TAN
• Proof of Rental Payments when possible!
• Proof of Support Expenses
• Proof of Other Expenses
• Other Proof (this category would include Additional Financial Information
for LTC, HFS 3654 and Other Related Verification Documents not 27
categorized elsewhere).

Document Type
Indicate the document type you are submitting from the drop down. (In this
example the category selected is Other Proof and the document is an Additional
Financial Information for LTC, HFS 3654).
REMEMBER! It is very important to separate proof documents by category and
type. Do not upload all documents together. There are separate verification
‘queues’ the documents drop into depending on how the document was identified
when you uploaded them. If you upload files together, it could appear that
required documents are missing and some of the documents could be missed!

Click the browse button to locate
the desired document file Click Yes to
upload more
You will have the opportunity to add Proof documents from
documents for another category on the next this category.
page. If you change your mind and do not
have a Proof Document to submit in this 28
category, select Skip This Document. Click
[Next].

Document Summary
• On the Document Summary page, review the Proof Category and the
Document Type. You can view the document selected to verify that it is correct
– and erase it if it is not the right document.
• If you have documents in other Proof Categories, use the Type of Proof drop
down under Upload Another Document to select the next document you would
like to add. Click [Add]. You can add up to 10 documents at a time. If you have
more than 10 documents, submit the first 10 and then begin the process again.

**On RARE occasion,
you will see more than
one individual listed on
the case. For example,
this could occur for a
short term
rehabilitation stay. In
these instances you will
need to choose the 29
individual you wish to
upload docs for.

Print and Submit
Once all documents have been uploaded and BEFORE submitting, PRINT
out a copy of the Summary page to keep as your receipt . The Summary will
list all documents that were successfully uploaded. Click [Submit]. The
documents will be transferred to the client’s case record for a LTC worker to
process.

30

Confirmation and Location
The confirmation page is your ‘proof’ that the documents were transmitted
successfully and gives the address of the office that received them based on
where the case is assigned. PRINT out this page and attach to the
Document Summary page for your records. Use the Click here link to upload
additional documents or Logout of ABE.

31

Thank you!

Thank you for taking the time to view this Introduction for Long Term Care
Providers and learn more about ABE - the Application for Benefits Eligibility.
We hope you found this presentation useful. A LTC Guide and specific Job
Aids are also available on the Long Term Services and Support (LTSS) page
for your assistance.

If you have any questions about using ABE, please e-mail them to
HFS.ABEPartnerportal@Illinois.gov

32

Additional ABE Partner Portal Resources
• ABE Partner Portal Problems and Questions
HFS.ABEpartnerportal@Illinois.gov

• To be approved as the ASA for your facility go to: ABE ASA Request
SharePoint

• Additional training materials are available on the Long Term Services and
Support (LTSS) page.

• The 1706P Form (must be completed and stored at your facility for all
system users!) can be found on the HFS Medical Forms page under
Providers, labeled Application for Benefits Eligibility (ABE) (pdf)

• How do I know if my facility has already assigned a Primary ASA? Check with 33
your administration/billing office or send the question to
HFS.ABEPartnerPortal@illinois.gov

Section 4
Primary ASA Tasks and Responsibilities

ASA Responsibilities
• Each Partner organization that will use the Application for Benefits Eligibility
(ABE) Partner Portal must select a senior staff member to serve as the
organization’s Primary ABE Agency Security Administrator (ASA). The
Primary ASA serves as the HFS point of contact regarding the organization’s
ABE participation, and will be responsible for administering the ABE security
protocols at their agency. The Primary ASA:

• Will enter their ABE Partner Portal account information as well as
agency/hospital information on the ABE ASA Request SharePoint site.
• Is responsible for designating another staff member for this position should
they leave the agency (before leaving)!
• Will submit a deactivation request and direct the new Primary ASA to submit
their ABE Partner Portal account and hospital/agency information on the ABE
ASA Request SharePoint site.

35

Responsibilities, continued

• May designate four additional agency staff as ASAs
• Approves Partner Portal ‘Regular Users’ from the agency
• Maintains Picture ID and 1706P records for all Partner Portal Users at the
agency
• Terminates ABE Partner Portal access when staff leave the agency or are
otherwise determined to no longer need access
• All ASAs are also able to perform the same functions in the Portal as a
‘Regular User’ for their User Type

36

ASA Registration Overview
• The Primary ASA should be the first person from the organization or location
to register in ABE (refer to the Creating an ABE Partner Portal Account Job
Aid for assistance). When completing the registration screen, indicate that
you are the designated security administrator in the Type of User section.

• After Registration, the Primary ASA will then go to: ABE ASA Request
SharePoint site. and enter individual and agency/hospital information.

• The HFS Business Unit will approve the account and the HFS Global Security
Administrator (GSA) will grant access to the Portal. The Primary ASA will get
an auto-notification e-mail indicating that their registration has been
approved

• The ASA should then invite the organization’s remaining users to set up
their own ABE Partner Portal Accounts.
37

Registration Overview, continued
• ASAs should verify the identity of each ABE Partner Portal user by reviewing
a valid picture ID.

• Valid forms of identification include:
• Current and valid US driver’s license or state identity card
• US passport
• US military identification
• Certificate of citizenship or naturalization, and various immigration forms for non-
US citizens.

• It is critical that all users remember their username and password as well as
the answers to their security questions. Users will not be able to change
their password or make other changes to their account if they do not have
that information.
38

Approving Facility Users
• The ASA will use the Manage My Account feature in ABE to approve each
ABE user. As an ASA you will see this option that ‘regular users’ do not see
in this section. Under Manage My Account select Search for users from my
organization. Click [Next]. The Search Criteria page displays.

39

User Search
• Search for Users. Enter information for the user. Click [Next]. You do not
need to enter full name and birthdate, but the more information entered
the fewer user names will display and the quicker your Search Results will
come up.

40

Search Results
• Search Results Display. Names that meet the search criteria entered will
display. All new staff will display as “New” under Type of User. Click the [Go]
button next to the user’s name in the list to change Type of User.

41

User Access Details
• The User Access Detail screen displays. When the User Access Details page
displays, the default of [No Access] will display for a new user. Select the Upload
Only option in the bottom box. You may also choose to make this person an
Administrator by checking the box on the bottom left.

Click [Submit]. [If
the staff member
leaves the
organization, be
sure to revisit this
section and change
the user’s profile to
Remove this user
permanently. 42

Updated User Type
• Updated User Type is Displayed. You will not get a confirmation message,
but the User will now display as an existing user on their User Access
Details screen. Any time you need to change the Users access you will select
the [Go] button for the chosen User.

43

Thank You!
• The staff member is now able to login and use ABE to submit
applications/enrollments/birth reports or documents depending on their
user type.
• Make sure that a ABE Partner Portal Registration Form 1706P has been
submitted to the ASA for every ABE user at your
agency/facility/organization.
• It is the responsibility of the Primary ASA to maintain an accurate user list
and keep copies of each user’s Registration Form and Identity Verification
(picture ID) on file at your agency.
• If you have any questions about using ABE, please e-mail them to
HFS.ABEPartnerPortal@Illinois.gov

**Remember to keep HFS informed of any Primary ASA changes at your
organization! 44
