WGIUPD GENERAL INFORMATION SYSTEM 06/22/26
DIVISION: Office of Health Insurance Programs PAGE 1
GIS 26 MA/10

TO: Local District Commissioners, Medicaid Directors

FROM: Gabrielle Armenia, Director
Division of Eligibility and Marketplace Integration

SUBJECT: Discontinuance of Continuous Coverage for MAGI Adults and
Children from Birth to age Six

EFFECTIVE DATE: Immediately

CONTACT PERSON: Local District Support Unit
Rest of State (518) 474-8887 New York City (212) 417-4500

The purpose of this General Information System (GIS) message is to advise Local Departments
of Social Services (LDSS) of changes in policy related to continuous coverage. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is no longer approving or renewing, authority in states’
Section 1115 Waivers for continuous coverage for adults or continuous coverage for more than
12 months for children enrolled in Medicaid or Child Health Plus. CMS has also requested
plans from states regarding their unwinding of approved demonstrations regarding continuous
coverage for these populations.

Therefore, effective July 1, 2026, the following authorities will end:

• Twelve-month continuous coverage for adults eligible for Medicaid under the Modified
Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) category, as described in GIS 15 MA/022, and
• Continuous coverage for children from Birth to Age Six, as described in GIS 24 MA/10.

Adults and children receive the above-referenced continuous coverage through NY State of
Health. To rescind the continuous coverage provisions, starting in May, NY State of Health will
redetermine eligibility for individuals who are currently only eligible due to adult continuous
coverage or children’s continuous coverage from birth to age six. If they are found to be
ineligible or do not complete their renewal, their Medicaid will be terminated with timely notice.
If, upon renewal, they are determined eligible for another program such as Child Health Plus or
Essential Plan, they will be transitioned to the new coverage with timely notice.

Local Districts should no longer receive referrals requesting manual extensions for children past
the initial 12-month continuous coverage period and should no longer provide extensions except
for 12-months continuous coverage for children.

Please direct any questions to your local district support liaison.
