Skip to content

Program Operations Manual System (POMS)

Effective Dates: 12/21/2022 - Present
Previous | Next

TN 71 (12-22)

HI 00805.384 Exceptional Conditions Special Enrollment Period (SEP) for Group Health Plan (GHP)
or Employer Misrepresentation

A. Background

Often, the primary source of information about Medicare for working individuals is
their employer or the carrier of their GHP. Despite the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services' (CMS) efforts to provide information to the working population, the potential
for the dissemination of misinformation exists. In some cases, individuals may receive
erroneous information from their employer or GHP that results in the individual not
engaging in timely Part B enrollment and consequently being assessed a premium surcharge.

B. Eligibility

1.

This SEP applies for individuals whose non-enrollment in premium Part A or Part B
is unintentional, inadvertent, or erroneous and results from material misrepresentation
or reliance on incorrect information provided by an employer or GHP, brokers or agents
of private health plans, or anyone authorized to act on behalf of such organization.
Note that the agents or brokers of private health plans are not required to be direct
employees of the health plan in order to qualify as sources of misinformation for
the purposes of this SEP.

2.

To be eligible for this SEP, an individual must demonstrate that they:

a.

Did not enroll in premium Part A or Part B during their IEP, GEP or another SEP in
which they were eligible based on information received from an employer, GHP, or brokers
or agents of private health plans that may have been a source of misinformation, and

b.

An employer, GHP, or brokers or agents of a private health plan materially misrepresented
information or provided incorrect information relating to enrollment in premium Part
A or Part B. The material misrepresentation or incorrect information must have occurred
on or after January 1, 2023.

NOTE: The person must have missed an enrollment period to be eligible for this
SEP.

C. Proof

1.

Primary Proof

The individual will be required to provide documentation of the relevant misrepresentation
to SSA. The documentation must show the:

•

information was provided directly from an employer, GHP, or agent or brokers of a
private health plan prior to their IEP, GEP or another SEP, and

•

inaccuracy that caused the individual not to enroll timely.

Example: The individual receives a letter (or GHP website public notice) from their employer
or GHP that materially misrepresents the Medicare enrollment process which caused
them to not enroll in Medicare during their IEP.

NOTE: Form CMS-L564 (Request for Employment Information) is not required for
this SEP enrollment.

2.

Secondary Proof

Alternatively, a written and signed statement from the beneficiary is sufficient evidence
for eligibility for this SEP.

The written statement must include a detailed account of the incident including:

•

the name and title of the person who provided the misinformation;

•

the name of the company;

•

the approximate date in which the misinformation was provided; and

•

a description of what misinformation was provided.

D. Duration

The SEP duration begins the day the individual contacts SSA about being misinformed
and ends on the last day of the month six months later.

Example: An individual discovers they received erroneous information from their GHP. They
contact SSA with supporting documentation on May 16, 2023, then the individual’s SEP
begins on May 16, 2023 and ends on November 30, 2023. The individual has until November
30, 2023 to enroll under the GHP or Employer Misrepresentation SEP.

E. Calculation of premium surcharge

There will be no premium surcharge when enrolled based on this SEP.

F. Effective date

The individual’s coverage begins the first day of the month following the month of
enrollment.

Example: The individual enrolls on May 16, 2023. Coverage will begin on June 1, 2023.

G. Processing instructions

See HI 00805.277 Processing SEP Enrollments for processing instructions.

H. Reference

HI 00805.277 Processing SEP Enrollments

To Link to this section - Use this URL:
http://policy.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0600805384

HI 00805.384 - Exceptional Conditions Special Enrollment Period (SEP) for Group Health Plan (GHP) or Employer Misrepresentation - 12/21/2022

Batch run: 10/10/2024

Rev:12/21/2022
