How to Complete the MEDICARE SAVINGS PROGRAM APPLICATION DOH-4328

Instructions:
Step 1: Print the MEDICARE SAVINGS PROGRAM APPLICATION
Step 2: Complete the Application
Be sure to answer all the questions. If you are married and living with your spouse, you must
complete both the “Self” & “Spouse” questions on the application (even if the spouse is not
applying for the MSP).
Step 3: Read all the information on page #2
Step 4: Sign and Date the Application
If both spouses are applying, both must sign the MSP application.
Step 5: Gather and include the following verification documents (or equivalents) with your
application:

• A photocopy of the front and back of your Medicare card (red, white and blue card).

• Proof of Date of Birth, such as State Driver’s license, U.S. Birth Certificate, U.S.
passport, Permanent Resident Card (“Green Card”), or NYS Benefit Identification Card.

• Proof of Residence, such as lease/ letter/ rent receipt with your home address from
landlord, utility bill (gas, electric, phone, cable, fuel or water), property tax records or
mortgage statement, or a postmarked envelope (cannot use if sent to a P.O. Box). These
documents must be dated within 6 months of when you signed the application.

• Proof of income, such as paycheck stubs (4 weeks), a letter from employer, pension
information indicating amount and frequency of payment, income tax return, award letter
for any unearned income benefit such as Social Security,
unemployment, or veteran’s benefit, or letter from renter, boarder or tenant.

• Proof of any other health insurance premium that you pay other than Medicare,
such as a letter from employer, premium statement or pay stub.

• If you are not a U. S. citizen, you must provide documents indicating your current
immigration status such as I-551 Permanent Resident Card (“Green Card”), I-766
Employment Authorization Card.

If there is an applying spouse, the spouse must also provide the documentation mentioned above.

Step 6: Before mailing your application, be sure you answer all the questions, sign and date
it, and include your documentation. Make a copy of your completed application for your records.

Step 7: Mail the application and required documentation to your Local Department of
Social Services (LDSS) or Human Resource Administration (HRA). Click Here (insert as link)
to find the address in your county. http://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/medicaid/ldss.htm
Step 8: The LDSS will send you a Notice of Action within 45 days of filing an application. This
notice will tell you if you will get the MSP benefit.

You will need to renew (recertify) your MSP every year. If you do not receive a notice in the mail
to recertify, contact your local Medicaid office or HRA and ask what you need to do to make sure
you keep getting your MSP benefits in the following year.

*If you need further help you may contact the Medicaid Help Line 1-800-541-2831
