July 14, 2025

CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ALL COUNTY LETTER NO. 25-50

The purpose of this All County Letter is to inform County Welfare Departments of changes
to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, known as CalFresh in California, as a
result of the codification of House Resolution 1, An Act To provide for reconciliation
pursuant to title II of H. Con. Res. 14. on July 4, 2025.

July 14, 2025

ALL COUNTY LETTER (ACL) NO. 25-50

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS
ALL CALFRESH PROGRAM SPECIALISTS
ALL CONSORTIA REPRSENTATIVES
ALL QUALITY CONTROL COORDINATORS

SUBJECT: CALFRESH IMPACTS DUE TO HOUSE RESOLUTION 1 (H.R. 1)

REFERENCE: HOUSE RESOLUTION 1 (PUBLIC LAW 119-21); UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOOD AND NUTRITION
SERVICE MEMO – SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION OF REGULATORY CHANGES TO
STANDARD UTILITY ALLOWANCES; WELFARE AND
INSTITUTIONS CODE (WIC) SECTION 18906.5; ALL COUNTY
LETTER (ACL) NO. 14-66; ACL NO. 19-93

The purpose of this All County Letter (ACL) is to inform County Welfare Departments
(CWDs) of changes to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), known as
CalFresh in California, as a result of the codification of House Resolution 1 (H.R. 1), An Act
To provide for reconciliation pursuant to title II of H. Con. Res. 14. (the Act) (Public Law
119-21) on July 4, 2025. More details, including implementation dates, will be provided in
forthcoming county letters.

BACKGROUND

On July 4, 2025, President Trump signed the Act into law, which includes significant
changes to SNAP. Pursuant to the Act, these changes have various effective dates, and in
some instances, no effective date is specified. In the past, the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) has issued guidance regarding
implementation timelines when no effective date is specified in federal statutory changes
which alter SNAP requirements. The California Department of Social Services (CDSS) has
been informed that FNS will issue similar policy guidance to address the lack of specificity
regarding implementation dates for certain programmatic changes in the Act.

PROVISIONS OF THE ACT THAT IMPACT CALFRESH

All County Letter No. 25-50
Page Two

Re-evaluation of the Thrifty Food Plan
Section 10101 (7 U.S.C. section 2012)

No CWD action required.

The Thrifty Food Plan (TFP) outlines the cost of a nutritious, minimal-cost diet that can be
prepared at home. It serves as the basis for determining the maximum SNAP benefit
allotments based on household size. The TFP is updated periodically to reflect current
dietary guidelines and food prices, ensuring benefit values are adequate to purchase a
healthy, affordable diet.

The Act specifies the percentages of the TFP for household sizes. Specifically, it caps
benefit amounts for households with nine or more members. The cap is equivalent to 200
percent of the TFP for a household of four. Further, the Act specifies that the next re-
evaluation of the TFP may occur no earlier than October 1, 2027, and any adjustment must
be cost neutral. These changes limit increases in SNAP benefit allotments due to a change
in dietary guidelines or the rising cost of food over time.

These changes will be implemented based on benefit tables issued by FNS which will be
released with the annual Cost of Living Adjustment changes.

Modifications to Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents Work Requirements
Section 10102 (7 U.S.C. section 2015(o))

CWD action will be required. Additional policy and implementation guidance is
forthcoming.

Prior to the passage of the Act, an Able-Bodied Adult Without Dependents (ABAWD) was a
person between the ages of 18-54, who could work, and did not have children under the
age of 18 in their CalFresh household. People who are considered ABAWDs are limited to
three full months of CalFresh benefits every 36 months (three years). ABAWDs may receive
benefits for longer than three months if they are working, excused from the time limit, or are
living in an area that is waived from the time limit. For more information on ABAWD time
limit rules, reference ACL No. 19-93, issued September 12, 2019.

The Act makes the following changes to ABAWD time limit rules:

• Changes the definition of an ABAWD to include individuals ages 18-64.
• Limits the work requirement exception to those who have a dependent child under
the age of 14.
• Upon implementation, immediately eliminates work requirement exemptions for
people experiencing homelessness, individuals under age 24 who aged out of foster
care at 18, and veterans, which were previously set to expire on October 1, 2030.
• Adds a work requirement exemption for individuals who are Indians, Urban Indians,
California Indians, and other Indians who are eligible for Indian Health Services.

All County Letter No. 25-50
Page Three

• Limits ABAWD waivers to only be permissible if an area has an unemployment rate
above 10 percent and removes the ability for waivers to be based on lack of
sufficient jobs.

As noted above, these changes will require CWD action, the details of which will be
provided in a subsequent county letter. In addition, changes to automation within the
California Statewide Automated Welfare System (CalSAWS), and updates to the statewide
client portal, BenefitsCal, will be necessary.

Limitation of Standard Utility Allowances Based on Receipt of Energy Assistance
Section 10103 (7 U.S.C. section 2014)

CWD action will be required. Additional policy and implementation guidance is
forthcoming.

Based on a federal option, California provides an annual $20.01 Low Income Home Energy
Assistance Program (LIHEAP) payment, known as the Standard Utility Allowance Subsidy
(SUAS), to ensure that all CalFresh households can claim the Standard Utility Allowance
(SUA). For more information on the SUAS, reference
ACL No. 14-66, issued September 19, 2014.

This provision of the Act limits the automatic application of the SUA based on receipt of a
LIHEAP funded benefit to households with elderly or disabled members, often referred to as
"Heat and Eat" and implemented in California as SUAS.

As noted above, this change will require CWD action, the details of which will be provided in
a subsequent county letter; as well as automation within CalSAWS.

Restrictions on Internet Expenses
Section 10104 (7 U.S.C. section 2014)

No CWD action required.

On November 18, 2024, FNS published Final Rule, SNAP: Standardization of Heating and
Cooling SUAS, amending regulations for calculating SUAS and expanding allowable shelter
expenses to include basic internet costs (89 FR 91198). The amended regulations became
effective on January 17, 2025, and states were required to ensure SUA value compliance
by October 1, 2025, along with other annual utility deduction updates. In some cases, a
higher SUA amount would have resulted in higher benefit amounts. For more information on
the Final Rule, reference FNS policy memo subject SNAP – Implementation of Regulatory
Changes to SUAS.

The Act excludes the cost of basic internet expenses when determining the SUA.

Prior to October 1, 2025, CDSS will submit to FNS for approval a SUA methodology for
Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2026 that is compliant with the Act.

All County Letter No. 25-50
Page Four

Funding Match Requirements Based on Payment Error Rates
Section 10105 (7 U.S.C. sections 2013(a) and 2022(a)(1))

CWD action will be required. Additional policy and implementation guidance is
forthcoming.

SNAP benefits are 100 percent federally funded. The Payment Error Rate (PER) measures
the accuracy of each state’s eligibility and benefit determinations, while the national
payment error rate represents the average of these error rates, weighted by state caseload
sizes. Payment errors include both underpayments and overpayments, as well as county
caused and client caused administrative errors.

Pursuant to the Act, effective FFY 2028 (October 1, 2027), state agencies will be required to
pay a percentage of CalFresh benefit allotments, on the sliding scale set forth below, if they
have a PER above 6.00 percent. Of note, this language does not alter existing liability and
financial penalty requirements for state agencies that are imposed based on the PER.

• For states with a PER below 6.00 percent there is a 0.00 percent state match;
• For states with a PER 6.00-7.99 percent there is a 5.00 precent state match;
• For states with a PER 8.00-9.99 percent there is a 10.00 percent state match;
• For states with a PER at 10.00 percent or higher there is a 15.00 percent state
match.

For FFY 2028, states are allowed to choose between using their PER in FFY 2025 or FFY
2026 to calculate their match percentage. Beginning in FFY 2029 and for each subsequent
year, states are required to use their PER from the third fiscal year prior to determine their
match rate for the fiscal year which is being calculated. For example, the FFY 2029 state
match rate will be determined based on the FFY 2026 PER.

If, for FFY 2025, the PER of a state multiplied by 1.5 is equal to or above 20 percent, the
initial implementation date of a state match shall be FFY 2029 (instead of FFY 2028). If, for
FFY 2026, the PER of a state multiplied by 1.5 is equal to or above 20 percent, the initial
implementation date shall be FFY 2030 (instead of FFY 2028). The USDA Secretary has no
discretion to alter a state’s assigned cost share and may not allow the federal cost-share to
exceed the cost share assigned to the federal government as detailed above.

Administrative Cost Sharing
Section 10106 (7 U.S.C. section 2025(a))

CWD action will be required. Additional policy and implementation guidance is
forthcoming.

Allowable SNAP administrative costs, known as State Administrative Expenses (SAE), are
currently split between the federal government and the state, 50 percent federal and 50
percent state, up to an annually approved amount. SAE covers costs like personnel,
technology, and other resources needed to process applications, manage benefits, conduct

All County Letter No. 25-50
Page Five

quality control, and outreach activities. Per Welfare and Institutions Code Section 18906.5,
the state must pay 70 percent of the nonfederal costs of administering CalFresh and the
counties must pay the remaining share of the nonfederal costs. As a result, in California, the
50 percent state share is split between the state (35 percent) and the counties (15 percent)
for all administrative costs.

Effective beginning FFY 2027 (October 1, 2026) and each year thereafter, the federal
portion of administrative costs will be reduced from 50 percent to 25 percent, thus
increasing the state’s share of administrative costs from 50 to 75 percent. The 75 percent
state share will be split between the state and counties at the existing 70 to 30 percent
sharing ratio specified in state law. This means the state will be responsible for 52.5 percent
and the counties will be responsible for 22.5 percent of the total cost.

Repeal of the National Education and Obesity Prevention Grant Program
Section 10107 (7 U.S.C. section 2036a(d)(1)(F)

No CWD action required.

CDSS provides administrative oversight of the SNAP Nutrition Education and Obesity
Prevention Grant Program, known as SNAP-Ed federally and as CalFresh Healthy Living in
California. CDSS administers CalFresh Healthy Living in collaboration with four State
Implementing Agencies (SIAs): Catholic Charities of California, Inc., the California
Department of Aging, the California Department of Public Health, and CalFresh Healthy
Living, University of California. SIAs work through a network of 111 Local Implementing
Agencies (LIAs) and community partners to reach CalFresh Healthy Living-eligible
populations.

Pursuant to the Act, funding for the CalFresh Healthy Living (CFHL) program will sunset at
the end of FFY 2025 (September 30, 2025).

Noncitizen Eligibility for CalFresh
Section 10108 (7 U.S.C. section 2015(f))

CWD action will be required. Additional policy and implementation guidance is
forthcoming.

Prior to the passage of the Act, federal SNAP benefits were available to certain lawfully
present noncitizens, such as asylees, refugees, parolees, battered noncitizens, trafficking
victims, and others.

The Act’s changes to SNAP noncitizen eligibility limit CalFresh eligibility to an individual who
resides in the United States (U.S.) and is a:

• Citizen;
• Lawfully Permanent Resident (LPR);
• Cuban or Haitian Entrant; or

All County Letter No. 25-50
Page Six

• An individual who resides in the U.S. in accordance with a Compact of Free
Association (COFA) agreement.

Refugees and those granted asylum, as well as any others not explicitly included in the
above are no longer eligible for CalFresh. All non-eligible, noncitizen financial resources in
any CalFresh household must continue to be included in eligibility and benefit
determinations, despite not being eligible for benefits.

As noted above, these changes will require CWD action, the details of which will be
provided in a subsequent county letter; changes to automation within the CalSAWS, and
updates to BenefitsCal, will be necessary.

If you have any questions or need additional guidance regarding the information in this
letter, contact the CalFresh Policy Bureau via email at CalFreshPolicy@dss.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Original Document Signed By

ALEXIS FERNÁNDEZ GARCIA
Deputy Director
Family Engagement and Empowerment Division
