Human Resources Administration311Search all NYC.gov websites

MenuServing New Yorkers with Care & Compassion

Text-Size

Search

Search

Search

Community Updates

SelectCommunity UpdatesClient ToolsProvider Tools & ResourcesFind a Partner Community Partners FAQNYCBenefitsOther Service Provider Opportunities

Community Updates

Client Tools

Provider Tools & Resources

Find a Partner

Community Partners FAQ

NYCBenefits

Other Service Provider Opportunities

Share

Print

DSS Contact Information

Please refer to the contact information below for general assistance:

All case-specific inquiries: DSS OneNumber at 718-557-1399

Hours: Monday - Friday: 8:00 AM - 5:00 PM

Medicaid inquiries: Medicaid Helpline at 888-692-6116

Hours: Monday - Friday: 8:00 AM - 5:00 PM

Medicaid Assistance Program (MAP) Authorized Resource Center (MARC)

General HRA/DHS questions and questions that are related to these updates and/or to enroll in the ACCESS HRA Provider Portal: DSSoutreach@dss.nyc.gov.

Summer EBT program questions: call the Customer Service Call Center at 833-452-0096 or visit the OTDA website.

Child Support inquiries: NY State Child Support Helpline at 888-208-4485

Stay Connected with DSS

Sign up for important news and updates from the NYC Department of Social Services.

What's New

Community Partners Calls

If you were not able to join our recent community update meetings, you can find recordings and additional resources below.

For the last quarterly call on September 29, 2026, please find the recording of it here (Passcode: @@ZwB.m2) to listen.

For the SNAP Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) Work Requirements Update Briefing on September 23, 2026, please find the recording of it here (Passcode: 6cR%P0ms) to listen. A copy of the presentation can be found here.

The next Community Partners Call will take place on Tuesday, December 8th, 2026, at 4:00 pm. The DSS Leadership team will provide important updates and offer a Q&A to answer your questions. Register here to join.

This call is specifically intended for Community Partners, including case workers, advocates, representatives from legal organizations, Elected Officials' offices, and municipal partners.

Community Partners Updates

Community Seminars on Upcoming Changes to Medicaid

The NYC Health Department will be hosting monthly webinars on the upcoming changes to Medicaid. These webinars are intended for community-based organizations who work directly with impacted New Yorkers. They will be held on the third Wednesday of each month. Register for upcoming webinars:

October 21 at 2 p.m.

November 18 at 2 p.m

For more information and additional resources, visit nyc.gov/medicaidhelp.

Update on Changes to Public Charge

The federal government has changed its rules for certain immigrants applying for green cards or visas and their use of public benefits. On July 16, 2026, DHS announced a final rule rescinding the 2022 public charge inadmissibility regulations. On August 18, 2026, the federal government published additional information explaining how the use of public benefits may affect an individual's immigration case. These proposed changes are currently in effect.

If you would like to learn more about these new rules, please visit the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs (MOIA) Public Charge webpage for timely, trusted information, including FAQs, flyers, and legal assistance resources.

New Yorkers can call MOIA’s Immigration Legal Support Hotline at 1-800-354-0365 for free and confidential immigration legal assistance (hours of operation can be found here), or call 311 and say, “Immigration Legal.”

New ABAWD 36-Month Compliance Period Begins October 1, 2026

A new 36-month period begins on October 1, 2026, for the Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) work requirements. ABAWD work requirement compliance operates on a fixed 36-month calendar, and this new three-year period will run through September 30, 2029.

Individuals who previously lost SNAP benefits for not complying with ABAWD work requirements and who reapply or are re-added to a case on or after October 1 will, if found eligible for SNAP and subject to ABAWD work requirements, be allowed three months of non-compliance before their benefits are closed or reduced.

Current SNAP recipients who are subject to ABAWD work requirements will have any prior non-compliant strikes reset to zero and will also have three new countable months of non-compliance.

The first month of potential reduction or loss of benefits will be January 2027.

SNAP recipients who are exempted from these work requirements remain exempted.

For more information on SNAP ABAWD work requirements, please visit our dedicated ABAWD webpage.

New SNAP ABAWD Work Requirement Webpage

The City has released an updated webpage for SNAP Able-Bodied Adults without Dependents (ABAWD) Work Requirements. On this webpage, clients can find:

compliance options,

how to identify ABAWD status on ACCESS HRA,

an Exemption Checker to find out if clients are eligible for an exemption,

how to report school enrollment, job search and volunteer activities, and job hours,

a volunteer hours calculator,

relevant forms in multiple languages,

contact information,

and more

We encourage providers to share the webpage with their clients as an informational reference and screening tool.

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Standards for FFY 2027- Effective October 1, 2026

We would like to share the annual changes to SNAP standard values for Federal Fiscal Year 2027, which are established in compliance with federal requirements.

State notices will not be sent out regarding these changes, so we are asking that our community partners share this information with their clients. See here for the updated SNAP standards for fiscal year 2027.

Implications for SNAP ABAWD Work Requirements

Note that for ABAWD participants who choose to use volunteering to fulfill their work requirements, this allotment increase may lead to an increase in the number of required hours per month.

For example:

Before October 1, 2026, a household size of 1 receiving the maximum SNAP allotment of $298 currently only has to complete 17 hours of volunteering per month ($298/$17 hours).

After October 1, 2026, this same ABAWD participant will receive a maximum SNAP allotment of $306 and will have to complete 18 hours ($306/$17 hours).

If you want to learn more about how to calculate volunteer hours for ABAWD participants, click here.

Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) Heating Equipment Repair and Replacement (HERR) and Clean & Tune Opening

The Heating Equipment Repair and Replacement (HERR) and Heating Equipment Clean & Tune (C&T) components open on October 1, 2026. For this heating season, the two components will be available to eligible homeowners of any age. Previously, HERR benefits for program year 2025-2026 were limited to applicants aged 60 or older at the time of application who owned and resided in the home where the heating equipment that requires repair or replacing was located.

The HERR benefit helps eligible homeowners repair or replace their furnace, boiler, and other direct heating equipment needed to keep their home’s main heating source working. HERR is only given to eligible applicants once every ten years.

Clean and Tune provides eligible households with energy efficiency services, which includes the cleaning of primary heating equipment. Services may also include chimney cleaning, minor repairs, or installation of carbon monoxide detectors or programmable thermostats, if needed, to allow for the safe, proper, and efficient operation of the heating equipment.

Benefits will be provided on a first-come, first-served basis to eligible applicants until funding is exhausted. For more information on the programs and how to apply, please visit our dedicated HEAP webpage. For the state GIS, click here.

Note: the HEAP Regular Component has not yet opened. We will notify our partners of the HEAP Regular Component opening date.

NYCBenefits Procurement - Concept Paper Release

Since 2023, DSS has funded nearly three dozen community-based organizations to engage in public benefits application and recertification support for a wide range of city, state, and federal benefits, as part of an initiative called NYCBenefits. Ahead of an anticipated Request for Proposals (RFP) for new contracts beginning in FY28, DSS has released a Concept Paper. Concept Papers outline any new or significantly re-designed services, and are an opportunity for our agency to collect feedback on proposed changes from existing and potential providers and other stakeholders. We will be sharing the link to the Concept Paper in the chat, and invite you all to an Information Session on October 6th at 10:30am.

Link to Concept Paper:

https://passport.cityofnewyork.us/page.aspx/en/bpm/process_manage_extranet/38167.

You can include all feedback, questions, and responses in an email sent to nycbenefits@dss.nyc.gov.

You can also join an information session that will be held via WebEx: https://nyc-dss.webex.com/nyc-dss/j.php?MTID=m65ff1c0c81e94e07c2d128bef155a625

Date & Time: October 6, 2026, 10:30am-12:00pm

Meeting number: 2338 559 7561

Password: prTnqRAx223

+1-646-992-2010 United States Toll (New York City)

+1-408-418-9388 United States Toll

Access code: 233 855 97561

NYCBenefits Concept Paper EPIN: 06926Y0443

If you wish to provide comments at this information session, it is strongly recommended that you submit your comments in writing prior to the session and register for this session using the information above.

Cash Assistance (CA) Automated Recertification Process for Eligible Clients

On September 26th, NYC DSS launched a new automated process that allows eligible Cash Assistance clients an opportunity to complete their recertification interview without speaking with an agent. Eligible clients who call the existing CA OnDemand number (929-273-1872) will be routed to an automated interview after successfully authenticating with a personal identifier, such as their Social Security number or case number. Clients will then complete their recertification questions through the automated interview and receive a confirmation number once the process is complete. Eligible clients are not required to submit their recertification prior to calling, and the system is available in 15 languages.

The new process is designed for eligible households with elderly (65+) or disabled/blind household members. If a client reports a change, such as a change in address, household composition or income, identifies an emergency need, or requests a reasonable accommodation, the system will transfer the client to an agent to complete their recertification. This new option gives eligible clients a simpler way to complete their recertification, maintain their case, and keep their benefits while allowing DSS agents time to focus on clients who require their assistance.

CEC Funding Opportunity for Projects Providing Housing Supports

The NYC Civic Engagement Commission (CEC) has opened the application for projects selected by New Yorkers this year through the People's Money. The CEC encourages CBOs that may be interested in implementing community-designed projects to apply. CEC has several projects promoting food security, job training, youth programming, and more.

The NYC Civic Engagement Commission (CEC) is looking for partners to implement the 20 expense projects that received the most votes in Cycle 4 of The People's Money, NYC’s citywide Participatory Budgeting (PB) process!

Selected organizations will receive funding ranging from $165,000 to $235,000 to implement the projects.

Who should apply to implement a project?

We’re looking for a diverse set of community-based organizations with strong ties to Taskforce on Racial Inclusion & Equity (TRIE) neighborhoods and experience delivering community-based programs and services. Applicants must be a registered 501(c)(3) or MWBE operating in New York City.

Application Details:

Project List: See a full list of winning projects, their funding amounts, and implementation geographies here

Application Link: See the questions here and submit your response here

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

Deadline to Apply: October 28th, 2026, at 11:59pm

Attend an information session on October 5th, 11am-12:30pm

For any questions, email us at opportunities@civicengagement.nyc.gov.

New York State Pilot Program for Medicaid Fair Hearing Withdrawal Requests

Effective September 9, 2026, the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) began a pilot program regarding the options for how clients who are appealing (appellants) can withdraw Medicaid fair hearing requests.

As a reminder, first-time applicants and returning Medicaid clients have the right to a state-level fair hearing if they wish to appeal a decision made on their case. Under the new pilot program, requests to withdraw Medicaid-related fair hearings can be made over the phone by the appellant or their authorized representative.

The pilot program is being instated by OTDA’s Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) and the New York State Department of Health (DOH) to address an inconsistency between federal and State regulations regarding appellant requests to withdraw a Medicaid fair hearing request. OAH allows telephonic fair hearing requests, amongst other modalities, and must therefore accept telephonic withdrawal requests.

During the telephonic withdrawal, the appellant will be told what effect withdrawing their request may have on their benefits and their case, followed by a recording of a telephonic signature. The client will receive a post-withdrawal notice following the call.

This pilot program will remain in place for one year starting on the effective date. For more information, click here.

Chip/Tap-to-Pay Technology Rollout for EBT Cards

We wanted to provide our community partners with an update on the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA)’s work to implement chip/tap enabled EBT cards for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and Cash Assistance (CA) households.

Electronic benefit theft continues to be a significant issue for EBT card holders in New York and across the country. The Enacted 2026-2027 State Budget provided OTDA with the funds needed to implement chip and tap-to-pay functionality for our EBT cards. Adoption of this more secure technology, along with other steps OTDA is taking, should significantly reduce instances of benefit theft. OTDA expects to begin the issuance of new chip-enabled cards in early 2027 with all cards issued over the course of several months. About two million new cards will be issued.

You can read more about the retailer readiness steps here: New York State Retailer Chip and Tap Card.

Financial institutions that operate ATMs have also been made aware of these needed changes, with more details available here: New York Financial Institution Letter - Chip and Tap Cards.

To ensure adequate time for testing and readiness to accept chip/tap-enabled EBT Cards, EBT retailers, financial institutions, and Restaurant Meal Program providers have been asked to make the required updates to their equipment no later than December 1, 2026. New York State EBT cardholders can continue to use their EBT cards during the transition.

Since new chip/tap-to-pay EBT cards will be distributed via mail, providers should begin to focus on ensuring that client mailing addresses are as up to date as possible in ACCESS HRA. Further guidance will be issued on alternate processes to deliver cards to those without reliable addresses.

Providers should continue to remind clients to protect their current EBT cards and benefits. Cardholders may continue to use the mobile app ebtEDGE and/or cardholder online portal to:

freeze and unfreeze their EBT card when not in use;

block online or out-of-state transactions;

check their available balance;

review transaction history;

confirm their last deposit;

select or change their PIN;

and report a damaged, lost, or stolen card and request that a replacement card be mailed.

Freezing a card blocks purchases, balance inquiries, and transactions until the card is unfrozen, and is currently one of the most reliable ways to protect benefits from theft. For more information and client education materials, please visit Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) | OTDA.

HRA will continue to update you on important developments in the statewide implementation of EBT chip/tap-to-pay cards.

Disability Rent Increase Exemption (DRIE) Reminder

We would like to remind you that the Disability Rent Increase Exemption (DRIE) operated through the Department of Finance (DOF) helps keep rent the same for individuals who are receiving a qualifying disability benefit.

Applying for DRIE does not require the landlord’s permission, and individuals do not need to file taxes to qualify. DRIE is renewed on a yearly basis to keep rent frozen. Even if the landlord raises the rent, DRIE recipients will continue to pay the same as before, and the landlord receives a tax credit to cover the difference.

To qualify for DRIE, individuals must:

Be 18 years old or older

Have their name on the lease

Have a household income of $50,000 or less per year

Spend more than one third of their monthly income on rent

Receive SSI, SSDI, Veteran Affairs disability pension or compensation, or disability-related Medicaid

Eligible individuals must live in one of the following:

A rent stabilized or rent controlled apartment

A Mitchell-Lama development

A Limited Dividend development

A redevelopment company development

A Housing Development Fund Company (HDFC) Cooperative Development

Section 213 Cooperative Unit,

A rent-regulated hotel or single-room occupancy unit

DRIE does not ask about immigration status.

For more information on required documents and how to apply, visit the ACCESS NYC page or the NYC Tenant Access Portal.

New Training Offering for Community Partners: Cash Assistance Program Overview and Application Webinar

We are pleased to notify our community partners that starting in October, we will be offering a new training that will focus specifically on the Cash Assistance application process. The Cash Assistance Program Overview and Application Webinar provides a comprehensive overview of the Cash Assistance program and application process. After completion, participants will be familiar with the steps needed to apply for Cash Assistance and/or Emergency Assistance based on the applicant’s need in ACCESS HRA. Sign up for the training here. This webinar is best for partners who wish to go more in-depth with understanding the interview process, documentation guidelines, and clarifying the correct steps to request emergency grants.

Office of Child Support Services Update

The Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) serves nearly 250,00 families and over 346,000 children across the city. That work is helped in part by the strong partnerships we have with community-based organizations that share our information with their clients. Here are three new activities that have occurred in recent months:

Child Support Proclamation

Each August, Child Support Awareness Month is celebrated across the country. At OCSS, we created a campaign to bring awareness to the importance of child support and the services we provide for New Yorkers who have or could benefit from having a child support order. There were bus shelter ads in all five boroughs, TV and radio public service announcements, and ads in taxis and on LinkNYC kiosks.

The highlight was receiving recognition from Mayor Zohran Mamdani for the work we do. The Mayor proclaimed August 28, 2026, as NYC HRA Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) Day. The proclamation provided a genuinely moving description of the program, as reflected in this one excerpt:

“OCSS recognizes that our children have a brighter future when families and communities are strengthened, and as we observe National Child Support Awareness Month, I am so heartened to know that its guiding principles of clarity, fairness, helpfulness, and respect are advanced every day, ensuring that everyone is treated with dignity and all voices are heard.”

Passport Revocation Threshold Decreased to $25,000 in Child Support Debt

Effective August 27, 2026, the U.S. Department of State (DOS) began revoking passports of parents who owe $25,000 or more in child support debt. In the next few months, the threshold will continue to decrease from the initial $100,000 threshold when this was first implemented until it reaches $2,500 in past-due child support.

DOS will send parents whose passports have been revoked a notice by email or mail informing them of this action.

The instructions on how to move forward are provided in the notice, but here are the two most important steps:

Step 1: Pay off the entire child support debt. Under New York State law, parents cannot enter into payment agreements or pay less than the full amount to obtain their passport.

Step 2: Apply for a new passport. Revoked passports will not be automatically reinstated after parents make their full child support payment. Parents whose passports were revoked must reapply for a passport.

Parents with questions about their child support case should contact OCSS.

Parents with questions about their passport should contact the U.S. Department of State.

New Easy Way to Request Free Child Support Posters, Palm Cards, and Flyers

OCSS wants to provide community-based organizations and other City agencies and programs with hard copies of key print materials so that parents and guardians can be informed about its services.

Custodial parents with a paying child support case received an average of $8,585 in 2025. These payments make a world of difference for families who depend on them.

OCSS also has services to assist noncustodial parents (the parent ordered to pay child support). These include debt reduction programs such as Pay It Off, which will be offered for a limited time next March, and employment programs designed to assist noncustodial parents in gaining meaningful employment.

Our Ask: Please use the simple order form to request print materials that inform your clients about child support services. They are free and delivered to your location. Included in the last two bullets are new posters which we encourage you to take a look here.

Here is a list of the printed materials that are available now:

Child Support Overview Flyer

How to Enroll for Child Support Services Flyer

Change or Stop Your Child Support Order Flyer

Debt Reduction and Job Programs to Assist Noncustodial Parents Flyer

Have Questions About Child Support Palm Card

Take the Mystery Out of Child Support Palm Card

Great Dads Poster Series

Two Parents One Responsibility Poster

New Schedule for Free Child Support Online Information Sessions Released

Making Child Support Easier to Understand

The Office of Child Support Services’ (OCSS’) Training Institute provides free online information sessions that help make the sometimes-complex issues surrounding child support easier to understand. The sessions are geared toward our community-based partners, parents/guardians, as well as city agencies and professionals who work with OCSS clients.

There are usually two sessions per month and they explore a topic in depth. A question-and-answer period follows.

Topics Include:

The Fundamentals of Child Support

Child Support Awareness Month: Listening to Parents and Guardians

Basics of Child Support for New Parents

How to Prepare for Family Court: What to Bring, What to Expect

Child Support Administrative Enforcement Actions - What Noncustodial Parents (NCPs) Need to Know

Child Support Debt Reduction Options for NCPs

For a full list of upcoming sessions and how to register, click https://on.nyc.gov/ocss-ti.

Energy Affordability Program (EAP) Outreach

The eligibility for the Department of Public Service’s (DPS) Energy Affordability Program (EAP) has expanded in 2026 to include millions more New York households.

EAP provides eligible customers with utility bill discounts on their monthly electric or natural gas bill.

The Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) is requesting assistance with outreach to inform households of this important opportunity to save on energy bills.

Questions relating to EAP should be directed to the household’s utility company.

Clients can apply online and learn more by visiting ny.gov/eap.

Expand AllCollapse All

Click a topic, or press the enter key on a topic, to reveal its answer.

Previous Communications

Prior Community Updates Bulletins

Prior Community Updates Bulletins

2026

2025

2024

2023

2022

2021

2020

Community Partner Calls

Community Partner Calls:

Here are our prior Community-wide Conference Call recordings. Enter the password Covid-19 to access the below recordings, unless otherwise noted.

Tuesday, 9/29/2026 Passcode: @@ZwB.m2

Wednesday, 9/23/2026 Passcode: 6cR%P0ms

Tuesday, 6/30/26 Passcode: v6Gum?rs

Tuesday, 3/3/2026 Audio Passcode: =%5K0f6Q

Tuesday, 12/9/2025 Audio Passcode: 4dcd$4S&

Monday, 12/8/2025 Audio Passcode: *b6L$rkU

Monday, 11/10/2025 Audio Passcode: j%J8hKed

Tuesday, 10/21/2025 Audio Passcode: z5W+5^vd

Tuesday, 9/16/2025 Audio Passcode: G1++mM3h

Tuesday, 06/24/2025 Audio Passcode: cvx@L3U2

Tuesday, 4/01/2025 Audio Passcode: 86!?d1iy

Tuesday, 12/10/2024 Audio Passcode: J!1$iRJ1

Tuesday, 9/10/2024 Audio Passcode: mk&87e%F

Tuesday, 3/5/2024 Audio Passcode: @v6JW0x+

Tuesday, 12/05/2023 Audio Passcode: &DH.Md3R

Tuesday, 9/19/2023 Audio Passcode: s3XHP+pV

Tuesday, 6/6/2023 Audio Passcode: 31OP=^L+

Tuesday, 12/13/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 10/18/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 9/20/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 8/23/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 7/26/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 6/28/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 5/17/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 3/8/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 2/22/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 2/8/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 2/1/2022 Audio

Tuesday, 1/18/2022 Audio

Wednesday, 7/21/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 7/6/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 6/22/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 5/25/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 5/11/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 5/4/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 4/27/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 4/20/2021 Audio

Tuesday, 4/13/2021 Audio

Service Information

Coming Soon: New ebtEDGE App and Web Portal

A new version of the ebtEDGE app and web portal is coming soon for EBT cardholders, but it is not ready for use yet in New York State.

Please encourage EBT cardholders to keep using their current mobile app and cardholder portal until the new version is live to manage their benefits. The current app and portal still lets cardholders check their balance, review transaction history, confirm their last deposit, select or change their PIN, and report a damaged, lost, or stolen card to request a replacement by mail.

Please share with clients how they can protect their benefits today:

Keep their EBT card frozen when they are not using it and unfreeze it before they make a purchase.

Block online and out-of-state purchases.

Never reply to texts, emails, calls, or messages that ask for their EBT account information or PIN.

For SCAM alert information, go to EBT Edge Scam Alert | OTDA.To read the GIS, click here.

Treatment of Department of Public Service (DPS) Energy Affordability Guarantee (EAG) Pilot Program Benefits for the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP), Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), and Cash Assistance (CA)

Effective immediately, the information below outlines how HRA will treat the Department of Public Service (DPS) Energy Affordability Guarantee (EAG) when determining eligibility for the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP), Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), and Cash Assistance (CA).

The DPS EAG pilot program supports electrification and energy affordability for 1,000 income-eligible households by providing a supplemental bill credit aimed at limiting a customer’s total household electricity costs to no more than 6% of their annual income.

HEAP Implications

Benefits received under the DPS EAG are excluded from the household’s income and must not be counted in the budget when determining HEAP eligibility for Regular, Emergency, Heating Equipment Repair and Replacement (HERR), Heating Equipment Clean and Tune (C&T), and Cooling Assistance benefits. Any remaining balance from DPS EAG benefits are not considered a liquid resource for the Emergency and HERR benefit components. A household’s participation in the DPS EAG does not prevent the household from receiving any HEAP benefit if all other benefit eligibility criteria are met.

SNAP Implications

The DPS EAG benefits are issued directly to the service provider on behalf of the SNAP household and therefore are not considered as income. In accordance with federal regulation, these benefits are exempt from both the initial and ongoing SNAP eligibility determination.

CA Implications

In accordance with New York State regulations, as benefits provided under the DPS EAG are limited to the use of a specified purpose, such benefits are exempt for CA purposes and must not be considered for initial and ongoing CA eligibility determination.

SNAP ABAWD Outreach Available for Community Events

On March 1, 2026, the new Able Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) work requirements went into effect for those in receipt of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits, and the Department of Social Services (DSS) is committed to ensuring that every new and existing SNAP applicant is screened for any applicable exemptions. DSS will actively identify these participants at the time of application, recertification, submission of periodic report, or change request submitted through ACCESS HRA.

As part of DSS’s commitment to ascertain that no client is adversely affected by the new work requirements, DSS, through the Office of Community Outreach, would like to support you in these efforts. To ensure that your clients receive timely and accurate information about ABAWD work requirements, the Office of Community Outreach can assign staff members to an already planned event, or partner with you to share these important updates.

Planned Events

DSS can assign 1-2 Outreach staff (more as needed depending on size of event) to your existing event to provide 1:1 assistance to clients. Staff can help individuals understand the new SNAP work requirements, identify next steps to remain compliant, and provide information on how to submit the exemption form.

If your organization is interested in this kind of support, please confirm using this form that your venue can host 1-2 DSS staff members. The space should also include tables and, ideally, though not required, an outlet to connect an agency device (i.e., laptop).

New Events

DSS Outreach would welcome the opportunity to partner with your organization to inform community members about the new SNAP work requirements. Our team can help individuals understand their ABAWD status, identify their PACE provider, and provide guidance on how to submit an exemption form, if applicable.

We would rely on your organization to host 2–3 DSS Outreach staff and provide an appropriate space to conduct these consultations.

Next Steps

If you would like the DSS community outreach team to staff your event, you can request assistance by completing this form, and someone from our team will be in touch with you soon. Please note that we will consider events on a rolling basis.

If you have any questions, please reach out to us at outreachevents@dss.nyc.gov.

SNAP Work Requirement Outreach Events

Some SNAP recipients who received notices requiring compliance with newly re-established SNAP work requirements for Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) may begin to experience benefit interruptions this month, June 2026, if they have not met work requirements or do not qualify for an exemption. As outlined above, clients will need to comply with SNAP work requirements or receive an approved exemption within 3 months of notification of the requirement to comply in order to maintain benefits. In an effort to mitigate the impact of changes associated with the federal H.R.1 bill on our shared clients, we want to remind you that the Office of Community Outreach is here as a resource to help educate and assist clients navigating these changes by coming to community events hosted expressly for this purpose, or to supplement other organized activities.

To request DSS assistance or coverage at your event, we invite you to complete this form. Once the form is submitted, someone from our office will reach out to you and work to identify coverage for your event to help clients understand these requirements, determine if they may qualify for an exemption, and get support with next steps, including submitting required forms.

If you have any questions, please contact us at outreachevents@dss.nyc.gov.

New Client Notice for HRA Documentation Collection

A new notice (FIA-1284) will be issued to clients who need to submit/resubmit information or documentation in order for HRA to make a determination on their application or recertification.

This notice will detail the reason that information is needed, such as:

The documentation submitted is not readable

The documentation was incomplete

HRA needs more or different documents to support the information provided by the applicant/client

The notice will list the new documents or additional information needed and include options for submission, which include:

Uploading on the ACCESS HRA mobile app;

Dropping off copies of documents in person to a Benefit Access Center;

Faxing documents; OR

Mailing documents

CBO Partnership Pathways for Community Service and Volunteer Engagement Opportunities

If your Community-Based Organization or agency is interested in partnering with HRA to offer community service or voluntary engagement opportunities to support cash assistance and SNAP recipients’ compliance with work requirements, please complete the CBO Provider Inquiry Form linked below. This form allows us to assess your program’s capacity, structure, and readiness so we can route you to the appropriate provider pathway: the Community Service Provider (CSP) track for high-touch organizations that can support structured, compliance-driven service activities, or the Self-Enrolled Voluntary Service Provider (SEVSP) track for light-touch programs offering voluntary, small-scale opportunities. Your submission enables our team to determine the correct pathway and ensure you receive the appropriate guidance and next steps. CBOs interested in being considered should begin by completing the inquiry form which can be accessed HERE.

No Fee Non-Driver IDs for Certain Public Assistance Recipients

We would like to remind you of a change to the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) policy regarding certain public assistance recipients’ eligibility to receive a non-driver ID without paying a fee.

To get a reduced fee or 'No Fee' non-driver ID, applicants must apply by mail or at a DMV office. Clients cannot apply online. The applicant may be eligible for a reduced fee or no fee non-driver ID if they are 62 or older and receive supplemental security income (SSI), or of any age and receiving Cash Assistance, SNAP, or Medicaid.

Individuals will need to provide proof that they receive CA, SNAP, or Medicaid via:

Client Notice System (CNS) notice that states benefits are “approved”, “recertified”, “changed”, or “same amount” with the name of the individual applying for a non-driver ID, case number, and effective date.

Welfare Management System (WMS) Budget Screen printout with the name of the individual applying for a non-driver ID, case number, and effective date. It must be accompanied by a Common Benefit Identification Card (CBIC/Welfare Card) with the name of the individual applying for a non-driver ID.

NYC only: Budget Letter with the name of the individual applying for a non-driver ID, case number, and effective date. Clients who reside in NYC may use ACCESS HRA to print their Budget Letter.

At a DMV office: Bring original proofs.

By mail: Send a photocopy of proofs.

These documents can be accessed through myBenefits, ACCESS HRA, or the ACCESS HRA Mobile App.

For more information, please read the Non-Driver ID Fees and Refunds section of the DMV website.

Changes to the SNAP Standard Utility Allowance (SUA) Policy for Households in Receipt of HEAP

It has been longstanding federal SNAP policy that households in receipt of a qualifying Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) payment are required to be provided with the Heating and Cooling Standard Utility Allowance (HCSUA) without needing to prove their utility costs.

However, due to the new federal law under HR1, the receipt of a qualifying LIHEAP payment will only grant presumptive HCSUA eligibility to households that have an aged and/or disabled member. All other households must establish that they have a separate heating or cooling utility expense in order to be determined eligible for HCSUA. This new policy will be implemented as of November 1, 2025, for all new and pending applications. Households ineligible for HCSUA due to these changes, may instead be entitled to the Utility SUA if they have a separate expense for a non-heating/cooling utility. These expenses include (but are not limited to): electricity (including air conditioning/cooling costs), cooking fuel, sewage, trash collection, water fees, fuel for heating hot water, and rental fee for a propane tank. Existing SNAP households will be assessed at recertification or if the household reports a case change on the periodic report or other time during their eligibility period.

For example: Jane Doe is a single mother with two children. No one in the household is elderly or has a disability. Her rent is $1000 per month and her gross earned income is $2000 per month. She receives SNAP and LIHEAP. Because she receives both benefits, she has in the past qualified for the HCSUA. This means her household of 3 gets $590 in monthly SNAP benefits. However, the next time Ms. Doe recertifies her benefits, she will need to demonstrate her utility costs (including non-heating utility costs). Depending on the utility costs she can prove, her benefits will change and could go down by as much as $116.

Please inform clients that moving forward, they may need to verify separate utility expenses at recertification or when reporting certain changes on a periodic report. This verifying documentation could include an electricity bill along with the client's attestation that a portion of that bill is used to pay for cooling/air conditioning.

Newly eligible SNAP households living in a HEAP-eligible housing arrangement may receive a $21 nominal HEAP benefit. However, only households containing an aged or disabled member will be eligible to receive the full HCSUA based on this factor alone.

For more information, you can read the full policy here.

Summary of SNAP and Medicaid Changes in the One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA)

On July 4, 2025, the President signed into law the One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) (the Act). This communication is intended to inform community partners about provisions in the legislation that will impact the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and Medicaid (MA).

The following changes as a result of the Act are not yet in effect and will not be enacted until the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) and the New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH) issue implementation guidance.

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

SNAP ABAWD Changes

Increases the Age of Those Subject to the ABAWD Time Limit:

The Act expands the age range for those who are subject to the ABAWD time limit. The Bill changes the ABAWD work rules age range to those 18-64 years old (currently, the work rule is 18-54).

Establishes a Dependent Child Age Threshold of 14 Years for Exemption from the ABAWD Time Limit:

The ABAWD exemption for adults residing in a SNAP household with a child under 18 is modified and now applies only to adults residing with a child under 14.

Removes Three Existing ABAWD Exemptions:

The Act removes the 3 specific exemptions from the ABAWD time limit established by the Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA) of 2023. These are:

Homeless individuals

Veterans

Individuals aged 24 or younger and in foster care on their 18th birthday.

Adds One New ABAWD Exemption:

The Act includes an ABAWD exemption for individuals who are Indians, Urban Indians, California Indians, and other Indians who are eligible for the Indian Health Services.

Changes to the ABAWD Waiver Criteria:

The Act limits the criteria states can request an ABAWD waiver to areas of the state that have an unemployment rate of over 10 percent. States are no longer able to seek ABAWD waivers for “lack of sufficient jobs”.

SNAP Policy/Eligibility Changes:

SNAP Eligibility for Non-Citizens: The Act further limits SNAP eligibility for non-citizens to only include Legal Permanent Residents, Cuban and Haitian Entrants, and those allowed to live in the US under the Compacts of Free Association. OTDA will provide updated policy information, as well as a revised Non-Citizen desk guide (LDSS-4579), when further federal guidance is issued.

Limits on “Heat and Eat”: States are restricted from increasing a household’s utility-based income deduction due to the household receiving a nominal HEAP benefit unless the household contains an elderly or disabled member. Households ineligible for the $21 HEAP payment may still be eligible for the Tier 2 (utility) or Tier 3 (telephone) based on household circumstances. OTDA will provide guidance on implementation of the changes when federal guidance is issued.

Other SNAP-related Changes

Thrifty Food Plan Adjustments: The Act limits when USDA can update the Thrifty Food Plan that is used as one factor in calculating SNAP benefit values. As a result, benefit adjustments would largely be based on Consumer Price Index changes. As a reminder, benefit amounts are released each year as part of the October SNAP Standards. There is no action required by districts as a result of this provision.

SNAP-Education Program Funding Eliminated: Federal funding is eliminated for the SNAP Education program effective at the end of FFY25 (September 30, 2025).

SNAP Funding Changes

SNAP Benefit Cost-Shift: The Act newly shifts responsibility for paying a portion of SNAP benefits onto states that have a Payment Error Rate (PER) of 6% or higher. The exact percentage of the state share is determined by the state’s PER. Benefit cost shift is effective October 1, 2027 (FFY28).

SNAP Administration Cost-Shift: Effective October 1, 2026, the federal share for SNAP administrative costs will be reduced from 50% to 25%, which will increase the State/local share from 50% to 75%.

Medicaid (MA)

Most of the impact of the passed reconciliation language on Medicaid becomes effective December 2026 or January 2027, including the work requirements and restrictions on immigrant populations. More information on work requirements and restrictions on immigrant populations will be provided when guidance is published by the New York State Department of Health.

Provisions that will go into effect as of December 2025 or January 2026 include enhanced ACA subsidy expiration, as well as Essential Plan elimination and funding cuts.

Funding Impact:

The reconciliation bill is anticipated to impact New York State health and healthcare at a total of $13.5 billion, with $10 billion in lost federal funding and $3.5 billion in new state costs. These losses will affect the following:

5 million individuals statewide will lose coverage, including 950,000 individuals in New York City (800,000 from Medicaid and 150,000 from Essential Plan)

The New York Essential Plan is anticipated to lose $7.5 billion, while New York State anticipates $2.7 billion in additional costs. As a result of these costs, 730,000 individuals will lose Essential Plan coverage statewide. Of these individuals, 506,000 will move to Medicaid and 224,000 will become uninsured.

Uncompensated care costs will increase by $1.3 billion, and New York City hospitals and other providers will experience a loss of revenue.

Other notable health-related changes driving coverage and access to loss include:

Immigrant eligibility restrictions

Expiration of Affordable Care Act (ACA) enhanced subsidies

Medicaid community engagement/work requirements with certain exemptions

Twice annual eligibility reverifications

Exclusion of Planned Parenthood from Medicaid funding

Provider tax restrictions

A reduction in the Emergency Medicaid expansion match rate

These changes are also anticipated to impact several specific New York demographics:

Children: 44% of New York State children are covered by Medicaid/CHIP.

Low-Income and Nursing Home Residents: Medicare does not provide sufficient coverage for low-income residents in need of residential care. Medicaid covers 64% of NYS nursing home residents.

Disabled New York State Residents: Hundreds of thousands of disabled New York State residents rely on Medicaid to afford healthcare.

Children of Veterans: An estimated 3.4 million children of veterans nationwide are covered by Medicaid/CHIP.

Immigrants: Various reconciliation provisions impose restrictions on benefit eligibility for lawfully present immigrants.

Black and Latino New Yorkers: Low income, black, and Latino New Yorkers have higher rates of Medicaid and Essential Plan use and will bear the burden of these cuts, thus experiencing further exacerbated social determinants to their health.

Please note that this summary is not intended to be exhaustive of all that is contained within the reconciliation bill, nor absolutely conclusive on all of its impacts. Our goal is to highlight key pieces that we feel will have impact on New York and specifically our NYC clients. We will be sure to send updates once we have more details to share about impact and implementation.

The Department of Youth and Community Development (DYCD) Needs Assessment and Public Hearings

As part of the Community Needs Assessment (CNA), the Department of Youth and Community Development (DYCD) and volunteer Neig+hborhood Advisory Board members will host 41 Public Hearings over the coming weeks. Each is a valuable resource and helps DYCD gather information about the highest priority needs of New Yorkers. This information will be used in various ways, including informing decisions about which federally-funded anti-poverty programs will be funded in each of the target neighborhoods.

Additional hearings will be announced once scheduled. DYCD encourages New Yorkers who are ages 14 and older from across the City to complete the survey as well as attend the public hearings.

Transition to New Career Services Workforce Development Program, Pathways for Access to Careers and Employment (PACE)

Work-required applicants/participants will no longer be referred to Career Pathways (including Youth Pathways, CareerCompass and Career Advance). Effective immediately, work-required applicants/participants will be waitlisted for completing employment plans and will get an appointment in the mail for some time after October 1, 2025.

Career Pathways programs officially close their doors on September 30, 2025, and will continue to provide client services through that date.

The new Workforce Development Program, Pathways for Access to Careers and Employment (PACE), will commence on October 1, 2025. Beginning on September 22, 2025, work-required applicants/participants will be referred directly to PACE.

On October 1, 2025, the following PACE providers will begin providing services in their boroughs of operation, as listed below:

America Works of New York (AWNY) – Manhattan, Queens, and the Bronx

Career Team LLC – Staten Island

DB Grant Associates – Brooklyn and the Bronx

Fedcap, NYC Inc. – Manhattan

Goodwill Industries of New York and New Jersey – Queens

National Association for Drug Abuse Problems (NADAP) – Brooklyn

Support for EBT Chip Card Technology Legislation

New York City has issued a memorandum in support for the proposed amendment to Section 95 of the Social Services Law, which would require the New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) to implement EMV chip technology in EBT cards by June 21, 2027.

As you are well aware, EBT skimming and cloning have had a devastating impact on low-income New Yorkers. As of January 2025, more than 120,000 skimming claims have been approved in NYC alone for SNAP and Cash Assistance, totaling nearly $48 million dollars in replacement benefits, 90% of which were for SNAP benefit replacement. Unfortunately, as of December 2024, federal authorization to replace stolen SNAP benefits has expired, and DSS/HRA can no longer issue reimbursements for these losses.

Modernizing EBT cards with chip technology is a critical safeguard. EMV chip cards generate a unique transaction code with each use, making them much harder to copy than traditional magnetic stripe cards. This technology is already the industry standard in commercial banking and has been adopted in states like California and Oklahoma.

In addition to enhancing security, chip technology would enable DSS/HRA Cash Assistance clients to use their EBT cards on MTA buses and subways, and access OMNY discounts, providing much-needed convenience and mobility.

We know many of you have been advocating for this change, and we want to underscore that we are fully aligned. We believe it’s important to show unified support for protecting New Yorkers from ongoing and preventable benefit theft.

Following the passage of the bill in the State Senate, the focus now shifts to securing action from the Assembly. If you're connected to advocacy efforts or in contact with elected officials, we encourage you to share your support for this legislation (S1465/A699). Raising awareness, both within our networks and publicly, can help keep momentum around this issue strong.

Public Benefits Survey – Childhood Poverty Reduction Advisory Council (CPRAC)

The Public Benefits Survey has been reopened for the foreseeable future so that we can continue to receive input from New Yorkers who use our programs. This survey is intended to give New Yorkers who’ve applied for/received SNAP, PA, and/or SSI an opportunity to provide feedback on their experiences. The survey is brief and should only take a few minutes.

To access the survey, please click here.

Updated survey flyers with QR codes can be accessed here to help promote and share with your clients.

The results of this survey will help guide the Child Poverty Reduction Advisory Council (CPRAC) on creating and prioritizing five policy proposal packages that could achieve a 50% reduction in child poverty, as well as address housing costs in New York. The Childhood Poverty Reduction Advisory Council (CPRAC) is tasked with reducing childhood poverty by 50% by 2032.

All of the proposed packages include child tax credit increases, as well as public benefits reforms such as the establishment of a State-funded food benefit targeted to New Yorkers unable to receive SNAP. Four of the five packages include more inclusive housing vouchers, which the Housing Committee has identified as their top priority. The fifth package also includes the inclusive housing vouchers, and a renter’s credit proposal.

To learn more, visit Child Poverty Reduction Advisory Council | OTDA (ny.gov)

If you’re interested in the live webcasts of the agency's public meetings, click here.

2025 Federal Poverty Level (FPL) Guidelines for EAF and ESNA Categories of Assistance

The income standards for Emergency Safety Net Assistance (ESNA) and Emergency Assistance to Needy Families with Children (EAF) are tied to the official Federal Poverty Guidelines, which are updated annually.

The following income guidelines for ESNA and EAF are in effect from April 1, 2025, through March 31, 2026.

For ESNA, financial eligibility is determined by gross income of the applying household, which cannot exceed 125% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) for the household size at the time of the application. See below for annual and monthly amounts as per the guidelines.

For EAF, financial eligibility is determined by gross income immediately available to the applicant on the date of application. The household must not have available resources to meet the emergency need, and the available income must be at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level for the household size. See below for annual and monthly income guidelines.

Please note that these Federal Poverty Guidelines do not go into effect for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or Earned Income Disregard at this time. Those levels are determined at different points in the year and information will be shared with providers when they go into effect.

New Payment Options for Fair Fares

Fair Fares NYC participants who use their discount on subways and eligible buses have new options on how they pay their fare! Participants can still choose to use the OMNY card they got from the Fair Fares NYC program. The new payment options include using a credit or debit card, mobile wallet, or a personal OMNY card. Current Fair Fares NYC participants can submit a request to switch their discount to a different payment method by logging into their ACCESS HRA account.

We also encourage clients to set up an OMNY account, where they can choose to use their bank card, mobile wallet, or their physical OMNY card. Note that the discount will only apply to one version of the card, whichever they tap first.

Discounts will no longer be applied to MetroCards, and any remaining MetroCard users were automatically switched over to OMNY on November 10, 2025.

As a reminder, all Fair Fares NYC enrollees with lost, stolen or damaged OMNY cards should report them via ACCESS HRA directly.

For more information on the Fair Fares program, eligibility criteria, and up-to-date income guidelines, visit www.nyc.gov/fairfares.

Fair Fares NYC Income Eligibility Increase

We are proud to share that effective November 1, 2025, the Fair Fares NYC income eligibility has increased and will apply to all applications and renewals that are processed on or after November 1, 2025. More New York City households may now be eligible for discounted fares!

The NYC Department of Social Services- Human Resources Administration (DSS-HRA) has expanded access to the Fair Fares transit discount by implementing a rule change that increases the program’s income eligibility standard to 150% of the federal poverty level. Previously, the Fair Fares discount was available only to New Yorkers ages 18 - 64 whose income was at or below 145% federal poverty level. As a result of this modification to eligibility standards, more New Yorkers will be able to enroll in the program and utilize this critical discount to commute to work, visit friends and family, access medical care, and enjoy all our great city has to offer with assistance for their transit expenses.

The New Fair Fares income limits per household size can be found in the chart below.

Fair Fares Income Guidelines

The Fair Fares NYC Program helps New York City residents with low incomes manage their transportation costs by providing them with a 50% discount on public transportation. Eligible New York City residents can receive either a 50% discount on subway and eligible bus fares or 50% off MTA Access-A-Ride paratransit trips.

Fair Fares NYC applications are open to eligible New Yorkers, ages 18-64, whose household income meets program income eligibility requirements. Subway and eligible bus discounts are open to New Yorkers who do not have, and are not eligible for, discounted transportation from the MTA or the City. If individuals meet the Fair Fares NYC eligibility criteria, they may be eligible for the Fair Fares NYC discount on Access-A-Ride fares even if they are already enrolled in the MTA reduced-fare Program for persons with disability or have an Access-A-Ride MetroCard.

Fair Fares enrollment is simple and can be completed online: Apply for Fair Fares on ACCESS HRA! View the “How to Enroll” videos in English and Spanish.

Many Cash Assistance and SNAP recipients can ride for half price. Each non-elderly adult should log into ACCESS HRA or create an account to complete their enrollment.

Encourage everyone to ride for half price with Fair Fares by sharing this short video about the program.

We continue to offer training on the Fair Fares NYC program and the application process for community and advocacy organizations, municipal agencies, and Elected Officials' office staff. Register for an upcoming session here.

Fair Fares NYC Program Transition to OMNY

OMNY Bulk Sales for Agencies & Non-Profits

The MTA has launched a new webpage designed specifically to support nonprofits with the transition from MetroCards to OMNY. We’ve been asked to help share this information widely and encourage feedback from organizations that currently distribute transit fare to clients.

What organizations should know:

OMNY bulk ordering & paper tickets

The new MTA webpage includes guidance on ordering OMNY cards, including 1-trip, 2-trip, and 12-trip paper OMNY tickets.

Paper OMNY tickets have a six-month validity period. Orders should be timed so tickets are distributed within 1–3 months of purchase.

To register for future OMNY card purchasing, nonprofits should email: OMNYMerchantSales@nyct.com.

The MTA’s new OMNY Bulk Sales webpage consolidates key information to support nonprofits during the transition. Please visit their webpage to learn more.

Reminder – Fair Fares has transitioned to OMNY

MetroCard is ending–current Fair Fares MetroCard holders can request an OMNY card via ACCESS HRA. Otherwise, they will automatically receive one when they renew their program enrollment or request a replacement card.

Clients will receive a new OMNY card for their subways and eligible buses discount one of several ways via the ACCESS HRA Fair Fares portal:

Selecting the subways and eligible buses discount type in a Fair Fares enrollment application

Selecting the subways and eligible buses discount type in a Fair Fares renewal

Reporting a MetroCard lost or stolen

Switching discount type from Access-A-Ride to subways and eligible buses

Completing the new ‘Switch Fair Fares Discount from MetroCard to OMNY’ form found in the Quick Links section of the portal homepage.

Updated FAQs are now available for reference, along with an instructional video to help amplify this update.

The ACCESS HRA client portal can be found here.

To go directly to the Fair Fares NYC application or home page, go here.

First Phase of the Fair Fares NYC Program Transition to OMNY

We are pleased to announce the first phase of the full transition of the Fair Fares program to OMNY, the MTA’s contactless fare payment system, following the conclusion of a successful Fair Fares pilot on OMNY between the DSS and the MTA.

The Fair Fares discount is available to New Yorkers, regardless of immigration status, between the ages of 18 and 64 whose income falls at or below 145 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL). Visit the Fair Fares website to check for eligibility, apply online and begin saving 50 percent on subway and eligible bus fares or MTA Access-A-Ride paratransit trips.

The switch to OMNY will make it easier for working-class New Yorkers to manage their transit funds and help participants save even more with automatic fare capping, which ensures that no Fair Fares client will pay more than $17 per week to ride the subway and eligible buses when using their Fair Fares-issued OMNY card.

During the first phase of the transition to OMNY, the Fair Fares discount will be available on Fair Fares-issued OMNY cards. All new program enrollees will receive a Fair Fares OMNY card instead of a MetroCard and will immediately be able to tap into the subway system or eligible buses after loading funds onto the card. Clients can add money to their Fair Fares OMNY card in the following ways:

at one of the more than 470 OMNY vending machinesinstalled in subway stations across the city,

select retail locations,

online by creating an OMNY account at https://omny.info/register,

or by calling OMNY customer service at 877-789-6669.

Current Fair Fares Metrocard holders may request an OMNY card at their convenience via ACCESS HRA. Otherwise, they will automatically receive one when they renew their program enrollment or request a replacement card. Clients can continue to use any active Fair Fares MetroCard until they either expire, or 30 days after the OMNY card request or program enrollment renewal, whichever comes first.

In the second phase of the transition, participants will be able to apply their Fair Fares discount to preexisting OMNY cards, bank cards, or mobile devices, making it even easier and more convenient to save on transit costs.

Updated FAQs are now available for reference, along with an instructional video to help amplify this update.

DSS OneNumber

DSS OneNumber Initiative

On January 30, 2023, DSS launched the DSS OneNumber, an agencywide initiative which consolidated most of DSS-HRA's Interactive Voice Response (IVR) system telephone numbers into one telephone number. The DSS OneNumber initiative was intended to modernize and expand the Agency's call center capabilities, as well as provide clients with the ability to remotely request assistance and receive information about their benefits and services.

The DSS OneNumber is a new Interactive Voice Response (IVR) system that consolidates most of the Agency's separate IVR systems into one public-facing customer service number. It also provides clients with self-service and agent-assisted supports for some of the Agency's largest benefit programs, including SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program), Cash Assistance, Medicaid, HASA (HIV/AIDS Services Administration), and HEAP (Home Energy Assistance Program). Stand-alone numbers, including the SNAP On-Demand interview number and the Homebound Customer Service Unit number, will, however, remain in place.

Streamlining phone numbers and IVR systems under the DSS OneNumber makes it easier for DSS-HRA clients to get the information they need by accessing one number with a comprehensive menu. Notable features of the DSS OneNumber include:

Direct Dialog: Allows callers to use their voice to navigate through the menu in certain languages. Touchtone navigation is also available.

Multi-language support: DSS-HRA is in full compliance with Local Law 30 by offering menu options and responses to self-service inquiries in all required languages. At any point, the caller can speak to a DSS-HRA agent to request interpretative services through Language Line.

Call Back Assist: Instead of waiting on hold during periods of high call volume, callers can opt to receive a call back from the Agency when their position in the queue is reached.

Calls placed to an existing agency phone number that is part of the DSS OneNumber consolidation are automatically forwarded to the DSS OneNumber. Individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing and use a videophone and/or communicate using American Sign Language (ASL) can still reach DSS-HRA by calling 347-474–4231.

Download a list of the programs and their corresponding phone numbers that are being consolidated under the DSS OneNumber

Download a list of numbers that are not being consolidated under the DSS OneNumber

Using the DSS OneNumber Self-Service Feature

The DSS OneNumber (formerly Infoline) offers a quick way for clients to get accurate information about their case without waiting to speak with a DSS OneNumber agent.

Clients can use the DSS OneNumber self-service feature to hear automated case information and request certain forms for some of the Agency's largest benefit programs, including SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program), Cash Assistance, Medicaid, HEAP (Home Energy Assistance Program), and HASA (HIV/AIDS Services Administration).

It is important to note that clients can also use ACCESS HRA to apply for some HRA benefits, submit documents for their application, manage their case, and much more! Read the ACCESS HRA Users Guide for more information.

How to Access the Self-Service Feature

To access the self-service feature, follow the steps below:

Choose your spoken language

Press 1 when prompted with "If you have applied for benefits or already have a case, you can get information without waiting for an agent"

Enter the requested information to locate your HRA case

Choose one of three identifiers (listed below):

Social Security Number

Case number

ACCESS HRA confirmation number

Enter the number associated with the selected identifier

Enter the date of birth for the case member whose information you provided

Types of Self-Service Information and Requests Available for Clients

The list below provides the automated case information and form requests that are available to clients who use the self-service feature.

SNAP & Cash Assistance

Application or case status

Appointment information

Benefit amount

Case member details

Budget letter requests

Payment information

Recertification information

Request forms

Medicaid

Application or case status

Coverage type & status

Deferral status

Deferral extension requests

Individual status

Renewal status

Request forms

Surplus information

Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP)

Application status

Benefit period

Benefit status

Benefit type

Payment amount, status, and type

HIV/Aids Services Administration (HASA)

Assigned Center

Case-by-case financial assessment (CBCFA)

application date

benefit amount

benefit type

status

Case Worker's email address

Self-Service Feature for Medicaid Providers

Medicaid providers can use the self-service feature to get case status and case information for their Medicaid clients.

To access the self-service feature, follow the steps below:

Choose your spoken language

Press 1 when prompted with "If you have applied for benefits or already have a case, you can get information without waiting for an agent"

Enter the requested information to locate your client's Medicaid case

Social Security Number

Case number

ACCESS HRA confirmation number

Choose one of three identifiers (listed below)

Enter the number associated with the selected identifier

Enter the date of birth for the case member whose information you provided

DSS OneNumber Updates

To provide case management support or advocacy, advocates and caseworkers are allowed to join HRA clients or applicants on phone calls with the DSS OneNumber, representatives are allowed to share information over the phone with both the client (or applicant) and the third party, if the client (or applicant) provides the representative with verbal consent to do so.

Clients or applicants may also complete a fillable PDF of the HRA third-party authorization form that can be signed digitally / electronically using Adobe or other third-party software. Click here to download the form. Completed third-party authorization forms can be emailed to constituentaffairs@dss.nyc.gov or faxed to (917) 639-9241, accompanied with the inquiry.

DSS OneNumber Whisper Words

Call Whispering is a call-handling feature designed to enhance customer service by providing agents with specific, automated information before or during an inbound call. This information is delivered through a discreet message, helping agents to better assist clients in real time.

The DSS OneNumber system utilizes the following set of "whisper words" which appear in the left-hand column and trigger specific actions listed in the right-hand column when spoken during the call. The whisper words are only recognized by the DSS OneNumber system if they are spoken when a caller is listening to the program area options on the main menu. A caller cannot use the whisper words if they have chosen to use the self-service feature.

Whisper Word

Corresponding Action

CASH

transfer to CASH ASSISTANCE menu

CASH ASSISTANCE

transfer to CASH ASSISTANCE menu

MEDICAID

transfer to Medicaid menu

SNAP

transfer to SNAP menu

HOUSING

transfer to housing assistance menu

COMPLAINT

transfer to complaints menu

DISABILITY

transfer to help with a disability menu

HOMEBOUND

transfer to help with a disability menu

HOME VISIT

transfer to help with a disability menu

REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

transfer to help with a disability menu

ACCOMMODATION

transfer to help with a disability menu

HANDICAPPED

transfer to help with a disability menu

CRIPPLED

transfer to help with a disability menu

DISABLED

transfer to help with a disability menu

HASA

transfer to HASA menu

HEAP

transfer to HEAP menu

CHILD SUPPORT

transfer to Child Support menu

APS

transfer to Adult Protective Services menu

FAIR FARES

transfer to Fair Fares menu

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

transfer to agent

BURIAL

transfer to Office of Burial Services menu

BURIAL SERVICES

transfer to Office of Burial Services menu

EMPLOYMENT

transfer to career services menu

CAREER SERVICES

transfer to career services menu

OTHER

transfer to agent

INTERPRETER

transfer to agent

EBT Scams & Replacement Benefits Claim’s Process

EBT Card PIN Restriction Feature

When an EBT cardholder’s information is compromised by an unauthorized individual with knowledge of their personal information, the thief is able to change the EBT card PIN without the cardholder’s permission.

When this happens, one course of action that we recommend protecting the card is to restrict the PIN so that it can only be changed in person. The ebtEDGE system provides workers with the option to restrict a participant’s PIN for their current EBT card, and any associated cards linked to the affected household’s CIN.

Once the PIN restriction has been activated, the cardholder will not be able to change their PIN online. Instead, they must visit a Benefits Access Center, SNAP, HASA, or OTC Site with their EBT card and a valid photo ID (if the EBT card has a photo, this counts towards the photo ID requirement).

As a reminder, there are five ways in which participants may change their CBIC PIN:

Call the EBT Customer Service at (888) 328-6399 and select the PIN change option using the ARU. For this option, participants must provide their Social Security number (SSN) and mailing address zip code.

Visit a BAC or SNAP Center and change the PIN using the State supplied VeriFone PIN selection device.

Visit the OTC Site.

Log in to ebtEDGE and change the PIN

Request for a new PIN to be mailed to the participant’s address of record.

Additional Password Feature

For further security, cardholders can add an additional password to their account by visiting a BAC. The additional password can include a combination of numbers and/or letters. Once this feature is added, the cardholder will need to enter the password after they enter their regular PIN when accessing their account online, on the app, or by phone.

Best Practices to Safeguard Against EBT Scams

Please see below for tips and resources to combat these types of scams.

Spoofing

Spoofing is when a caller deliberately falsifies the information transmitted to a client’s caller ID to disguise the caller’s identity. Clients should never provide personal information in response to unsolicited phone calls, even if the caller ID appears to be from EBT Customer Service or the DSS OneNumber.

Skimming and Card Cloning

Skimming or card cloning occurs when thieves gain access to a client’s benefits electronically, even if the client has never lost their EBT card. Skimming can happen anywhere that a client swipes their EBT card, even if the card is still in their possession.

To safeguard against these scams, we recommend the following:

Frequently changing the EBT account PIN. It is recommended that cardholders avoid selecting a PIN that is easy to guess such as repeated or consecutive numbers. Clients should NEVER give their PIN to anyone, not even to an HRA employee nor in the event that they are told their case will close.

Freezing the EBT card when not in use: Freezing helps to protect an EBT card from scam-related theft. Clients can freeze their card when it is not in use and then unfreeze it when they need to use it by logging in to your ebtEDGE Cardholder Portal. Select “Freeze Card” or “Unfreeze Card” under Account Services.

Blocking online and out-of-state purchases: Cardholders can use the ebtEDGE Cardholder Portal to protect their account by blocking transactions that occur on the web and outside of New York State. Select “Protect My Account” under Account Services to turn these features OFF/ON as needed.

Reviewing the account and transactions on a regular basis. Households should regularly review their account transactions and balances and immediately report their card lost or stolen should they notice any suspicious or questionable activity or transactions.

Reporting suspicious devices and activity. If they notice any sign that a skimmer may be in use, it's recommended that they alert the retailer and refrain from using the possible compromised machine.

Paying careful attention to swipe machines: Visually and physically inspect ATMs and card swipe machines before using them. Clients should avoid devices that appear loose or tampered with. Signs of skimming devices include:

The keypad feeling uneven or soft.

The machine appearing dented or tampered with.

Parts feeling loose when the device is grabbed or wiggled.

Parts looking out of alignment or detached from the rest.

Parts that are a different color or style than the rest of the machine.

Households may report their card lost or stolen at the EBT Customer Service Helpline (888-328-6399), on the ebtEDGE website, or on the ebtEDGE mobile app.

OTDA encourages community partners to explain the advantages of using the freeze card feature to EBT cardholders. We also encourage sharing the resources below with clients, as well as posting flyers to waiting areas and provider websites:

Safeguard Your Card – New EBT Freeze Card Feature (Pub-5261), available in English & Spanish

Protect Your Benefits from Skimming, available in multiple languages on the HRA website

Act Fast: Protect Your EBT Benefits Against Skimming Thieves (YouTube Video)

Safeguard Your EBT Card

Protect Your EBT Benefits in 5 Steps

For additional Benefit Replacement information and resources, please visit our dedicated webpage.

As a reminder, as of Sunday, May 19, 2024, New York State’s Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) system was successfully converted to a new EBT vendor, ebtEDGE.

The ConnectEBT online client portal and mobile app are no longer in use for EBT cardholders.

Cardholders should download the ebtEDGE mobile app or access the web portal, to:

Check transactions and deposits

Freeze/lock and unfreeze/unlock their card to prevent unauthorized transactions

Block internet and out-of-state transactions

Change their PIN (if needed)

Request a replacement card if lost, stolen or damaged

These security features can help to prevent scam-related electronic benefit theft, also known as “skimming”, “phishing”, or “card cloning”. Once clients set up their account, the above-mentioned features can be used to help keep their benefits safe.

To help promote the usage of the free and unfreeze feature of ebtEDGE DSS/HRA has created a social media toolkit which providers can use to help raise awareness along with our instructional video on "How to Submit a Claim for Electronically Stolen Benefits".

All EBT cards and PIN numbers remained the same and the EBT Customer Service Helpline also remained the same. As usual, cardholders can call 1-888-328-6399 for help with their EBT cards.

Cardholders will have to use a new website (www.ebtedge.com) or the ebtEDGE mobile app to monitor benefit issuances and transactions. They will have to set up a new account if they haven’t already. To download the app, visit the Apple or Google Play stores.

On the new ebtEDGE system, clients can access six months of transaction history via the website and mobile application. Transaction history dating back up to three years is available via the EBT Customer Service Helpline1-888-328-6399.

NYC households impacted by electronic benefit theft should continue to submit claims to the NYC Department of Social Services/Human Resources Administration to request the replacement of Cash Assistance benefits.

Clients are not required to have an active Cash Assistance case to submit a claim for replacement benefits. Clients with a closed or rejected case should submit a claim for replacement benefits under their old case number rather than submitting a new Cash Assistance application.

Individuals could receive up to two replacements each fiscal year for benefits stolen between January 1, 2022, and September 30, 2024, and one replacement each fiscal year beginning October 1, 2024.

The determination of the fiscal year for replacing TA cash benefits is made by the date the replacement benefit is issued to the household, not the date that the application was submitted or the date of theft.

What should clients do if their Cash Assistance benefits are stolen?

If a client's Cash benefits are stolen, they must complete the following steps to request replacement benefits:

1. Obtain EBT Transaction history: Part of the process of requesting replacement Cash Assistance benefits requires clients to review and make note of their EBT transaction history so that they can report the following information for each fraudulent transaction: the date the transaction occurred, the name and address of the business where the transaction occurred, the benefit type, and the amount of each fraudulent transaction. The transaction history will include mostly transactions that clients remember making and purchases that they're familiar with, from stores that they frequent. However, there is also the possibility that they may see transactions that look strange—from stores they've never shopped at, maybe even in states that they've never visited. These kinds of transactions may indicate potentially fraudulent activity. Clients should consider fraudulent transactions to be ones that they did not make or consent to. DSS/HRA recommends that clients use any of the following methods to obtain their EBT transaction history

Option 1: Accessing 6-months of EBT transaction history at ebtEDGE or by downloading the ebtEDGE mobile app (available for download in the Apple App Store and Google Play Store). Please note: If clients have never used ebtEDGE, they will need to create an account using an email address and valid EBT Card Number. If they have reported their card stolen, they will need to wait for their new card to arrive to create an ebtEDGE account.

Option 2: Call the toll-free EBT Customer Service line at 1-888-328-6399. Through the Customer Service line, clients can access an automated menu that allows them to hear their ten most recent transactions. Clients can also use the automated menu to request a two-month statement of their account history. Clients can also review transactions with and request a two-month statement from a live Customer Service representative. Transaction history dating back up to three years is available via the EBT Customer Service Helpline. Agents are available 24/7 and offer assistance in the following languages: Arabic, Chinese, English, Haitian Creole, Italian, Korean, Russian, and Spanish.

2. Report their EBT card as lost or stolen immediately after realizing the theft: Prior to submitting a claim for replacement benefits, clients are required to take the following steps to ensure their benefits are protected: report their EBT card lost or stolen, request a new card and change their account PIN by visiting ebtEDGE or calling the EBT Customer Service at 888-328-6399. Clients should also consider utilizing the additional security features available like freezing/locking and their cards when not in use and blocking internet and out-of-state transactions, as needed.

Note: Clients are not required to report the benefit theft to the NYPD to submit a claim for replacement benefits with DSS/HRA. If clients have already reported their EBT card as lost or stolen after the theft, they do not need to report it lost or stolen again to submit a claim.

3. Submit a Claim for Replacement Benefits: After reviewing their transaction history and identifying the fraudulent transactions, the client can then submit their claim to DSS/HRA. To file the claim, they will need the following:

Client Identification Number (CIN) of the head of household or case payee

Case Number

Current Mailing Address

Date, location, benefit type, and amount of each fraudulent transaction.

The information the client lists for each transaction should be identical to what is listed for the transaction in their ebtEDGE transaction history. Providing inaccurate information may result in a denial of the claim request.

How can clients submit claims for replacement Cash benefits?

Clients can submit a claim for replacement CA benefits using any of the following methods:

Online: Submitting a claim online is the fastest and easiest way to file! Filing a claim online may take as little as 10 minutes if the fraud has already been reported and the client has reviewed & identified the suspected fraudulent transactions. Submitting an online claim is strongly recommended by DSS/HRA.

By mail: Clients can print a paper claim form from our website, or they can obtain a paper claim form by calling the DSS OneNumber (718-557-1399) and requesting a form be mailed to them. Paper claim forms are also available in the local BAC or SNAP Center. Completed paper applications can be mailed to:

Department of Social Services
PO Box 02-9121
Brooklyn, GPO
Brooklyn, NY 11202

In-Person: Clients can submit a claim via paper form or on PC Banks in any Benefits Access, SNAP, or HASA Center. Find a Center near you.

When should a client expect to receive a decision on their claim?

Once a claim is submitted, the client should allow up to 30 calendar days to receive a decision notice in the mail. Clients should anticipate receiving their replacement benefits on their newest and most recently used EBT card at or around the time they receive their notice of determination.

Need Help Submitting A Claim?

If clients need assistance submitting their claims or have questions about the overall process, community-based organizations across the city can help. For more information on the assistance available or to schedule an appointment, clients should contact their preferred local organization at the phone numbers provided in the following links:

Citywide

Bronx

Brooklyn

Manhattan

Queens

Staten Island

As a reminder, when obtaining transaction history online, both OTDA and HRA recommend relying on ebtEDGE to obtain this information instead of third-party applications.

Outreach Materials and Resources for Community Partners

DSS/HRA released the following resources which are available by visiting https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/benefitreplacement.page.

These resources are available in the following languages: Arabic, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Polish, Russian, Simplified Chinese, Spanish, Traditional Chinese, and Urdu.

[Video] Benefit Replacement: How to Submit a Claim for Electronically Stolen Benefits

Online Claim Form

SNAP and Cash Assistance Benefit Skimming Replacement FAQ

Instructions for Completing the Stolen Benefits Claim Form

“What to Do If Your EBT Benefits Are Electronically Stolen” Brochure

“What to Do If Your EBT Benefits Are Electronically Stolen” Palm Card

EBT Card Lock Social Media Toolkit

Protect Your EBT Benefits in 5 Steps

In an effort to help SNAP participants better secure their benefits from scam-related theft, the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) has released new materials:

Safeguard Your Card – New EBT Freeze Card Feature

Act Fast: Protect Your EBT Benefits Against Skimming Thieves

The materials can be ordered through DPOS using the instructions below:

Community Partners interested in ordering materials from HRA and are ordering for the first time, should email DPOS (Design and Print Ordering System) Customer Service at DPOSCustomerService@dss.nyc.gov to have their organization/agency registered in the system. Once completed, the requestor will receive an email with a link to create an account, allowing their organization/agency the ability to order from HRA's catalog.

Organizations and agencies with already existing DPOS accounts, should log into their account using the appropriate link below:

For other NYC Agencies: https://nycdssagencies.myprintdesk.net/

For (CBO) NYC DSS Partners: https://nycdsspartners.myprintdesk.net/

Waivers

Extension of the Cash Assistance (CA) Interview Waiver on Single Issuance (SI) Cases for Shelter and Community Moves with Certain Rental Subsidy Programs

The Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) has approved a two-year extension of the waiver of the Cash Assistance (CA) interview requirement for certain applying households to support moveouts from shelter, as well as community moves to prevent eviction, with any of the following housing programs:

City Fighting Homelessness and Eviction Prevention Supplement (CityFHEPS);

DHS Supportive Housing placements;

Pathway Home; and

Section 8

Shelter Moves

Emergency Housing Voucher (EHV)

The waiver is now authorized from May 1, 2024, through April 30, 2026. OTDA initially approved the waiver for the period of May 19, 2023, through April 30, 2024.

Individuals moving either out of shelter or with a rental subsidy who are not in receipt of CA must apply for an emergency assistance grant (One-Shot Deal) to get help with moving-related costs (e.g., first month’s rent, broker fee, security voucher, etc.) and to get their rental subsidy processed so payments may be issued. As part of the application process, an eligibility interview is usually required before a determination can be made. As a result of the waiver discussed above, these households can now be approved for rental assistance, if eligible, without an interview.

This waiver is only applicable to the CA interview requirement. All other aspects of the eligibility review and determination requirements remain in effect.

Community partners assisting clients with rental subsidy packages should be aware that although these applicants will receive a message on ACCESS HRA (AHRA) to call for their CA interview after they submit their application, they are not required to do so.

Note: This waiver does not apply to households that qualify for and/or are applying for ongoing CA or who apply for SNAP at the same time as they apply for a One-Shot Deal. These households must continue to complete all the required steps of the CA and SNAP eligibility process, including an interview, prior to being approved for rental assistance.

The Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP)

The Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) is a federally funded program that helps low-income homeowners and renters heat and cool their homes.

HEAP consists of five seasonal components benefits: Regular HEAP Benefit, Emergency HEAP Benefit, Cooling Assistance Benefit, Clean and Tune Benefit and Heating Equipment and Repair and Replacement (HERR) Benefit.

Our dedicated webpage will be updated with instructions on how to apply for each HEAP component as well as opening and closing dates for each. You can also visit the OTDA HEAP webpage for more information.

IDNYC For All New Yorkers

IDNYC is the nation’s largest and most successful municipal ID program, providing all New York City residents ages 10 and up, regardless of background or immigration status, with a free government issued photo identification card broadly accepted across New York City. IDNYC provides access to a wide variety of services and programs offered by the City and cardholders enjoy benefits and discounts offered by businesses and cultural institutions across the five boroughs. An IDNYC card can be used as a public library card, to access immunization records, and to open a bank account at select financial institutions.

There are currently eleven IDNYC Enrollment Centers across the five boroughs. The newest IDNYC Enrollment Center was opened at 1910 Monterey Avenue, Bronx, NY 10457 on Monday, June 24, 2024. Click here to view the full list of IDNYC enrollment centers.

As a reminder, on January 29, 2024, DSS/HRA moved to an appointment-only model across all citywide IDNYC enrollment sites.

Appointments for in-person enrollment are released each week on Friday afternoons for the following Monday through Friday and can be booked by visiting the IDNYC Online Portal.

As a reminder:

IDNYC does not provide work authorization

IDNYC does not impact immigration status

IDNYC cannot be used to:

drive,

purchase alcohol or tobacco,

travel by plane or across land or sea borders.

Visit nyc.gov/idnyc to learn more about IDNYC Program Requirements.

IDNYC Card Cultural Benefits

IDNYC card is more than an ID—it’s your key to culture, savings, and experiences throughout the five boroughs. Don’t miss out—apply or renew your IDNYC card today and start enjoying the benefits!

As IDNYC celebrates 11 years of connecting New Yorkers to incredible benefits across the city, IDNYC would like to remind everyone that the card unlocks exclusive access to cultural, entertainment, and everyday savings! Whether you’re a brand-new applicant or renewing your card, which can begin up to 90 days before card expiration, applicants can take advantage of amazing perks.

Enjoy free one-year memberships to over 35 of New York City’s leading cultural institutions, including iconic destinations like the American Museum of Natural History and the New York Aquarium. Explore world-class museums, zoos, and botanical gardens—all at no cost with your IDNYC card.

Looking to save on everyday expenses? IDNYC cardholders receive:

5% off purchases at Food Bazaar (Monday–Friday, 7 AM–7 PM)

10% off NYC Parks and Recreation memberships

Discounts on rental cars, movie tickets, Broadway shows, and more

See the full list of benefits here. For more information and to apply, visit the IDNYC website

Support for Expansion of IDNYC

New York City (NYC) supports the New York State Assembly Bill A6662 and Senate Bill S163, which mandates acceptance of the New York City identity card (IDNYC) as a primary form of identification at all banking organizations.

IDNYC is the free, municipal identification card for New York City residents, ages 10 and up, and provides access to a wide variety of services and programs offered by the City. IDNYC benefits all city residents, regardless of their immigration status, including those from some of our most vulnerable communities – the unhoused, youth, the formerly incarcerated, and others who may have difficulty obtaining a government-issued photo ID. IDNYC is an important tool for accessing mainstream financial products like bank accounts, and has the potential to help its 1.68 million cardholders fully participate in the City’s economy. Since the launch of IDNYC in 2015, NYC has also partnered with ten banks and credit unions who currently accept IDNYC as a primary form of identification for opening a bank account.

Having a bank or credit union account can help individuals avoid reliance on high-cost alternative services, such as check cashers and non-bank fintech, build credit activity and banking relationships that provide greater access to loans and mortgages, use direct deposits as a safer way to receive payments, and make online purchases while limiting losses due to unauthorized use.

IDNYC as a primary identification also has potential to reduce the racial wealth gap in New York City. Unbanked households in New York City are concentrated in neighborhoods that consistently fall among those with the highest poverty rates and the lowest median household income, and where residents are predominantly Black and/or Latino.

Expanding primary identification options at banks and credits unions to include IDNYC will improve New Yorkers’ access to safer, mainstream banking services.

Family Justice Centers (FJCs)

NYC Family Justice Centers (FJC) are co-located multidisciplinary service centers providing vital social services, civil legal, and criminal justice assistance for survivors of domestic and gender-based violence and their children—all under one roof.

The Family Justice Centers offer guidance on immediate safety planning, shelter assistance, legal consultations, counseling sessions, case management sessions, community resources, and more. The FJCs provide free services and confidential assistance in person and over the phone. Click here to find borough-specific phone numbers and additional information. Persons with hearing impairments can use TTY 866-604-5350 to speak with a counselor.

Recent Relocation of HRA Centers and Offices

To view our current HRA center and office locations, please use the following link:

HRA Center Locations

Relocation of IDNYC Staten Island Application Center

We would like to advise you of the relocation of the IDNYC Staten Island Application Center. See details of the change below:

Program Services Background:

IDNYC provides free identification cards for all New York City residents. As a government-issued photo identification card, IDNYC secures access to City services that come from having recognized identification. IDNYC benefits every city resident, including the most vulnerable communities—the homeless, youth, the elderly, undocumented immigrants, the formerly incarcerated and others who may have difficulty obtaining other government-issued ID. IDNYC cardholders can access services and programs offered by the City as well as businesses. IDNYC helps enhance public safety by serving as a recognized ID for interacting with NYPD.

If you have any questions about this relocation in relation to constituent services, please contact DSS at DSSOutreach@dss.nyc.gov.

Update: Men and Adult Families Intake and Assessment Center Relocation

The Department of Homeless Services transitioned intake and assessment operations for men and adult families from its previous location at 400 East 30th Street in Manhattan.

Starting August 1, the Men's Single Adult intake center is located at 8 East 3rd Street between Bowery and Second Avenue in Manhattan. Also, the Adult Families' intake center is at 333 Bowery between East 2nd Street and East 3rd Street in Manhattan.

We are asking for your assistance in informing clients and staff to help ensure a smooth transition for those impacted by this change. Please share this information widely with affected clients and staff across your organizations. DSS and DHS are working closely with our City and State partners to conduct a comprehensive outreach and communications effort. We will be providing informational materials with you to support this transition as they become available.

Help Us Spread the Word: New Women’s Intake Center

New York City closed its existing intake center for homeless women and on March 30th opened a new 60,000-square-foot facility at 114 Snediker Avenue in East New York, Brooklyn.

We need your help spreading the word about this center opening. The 60,000-square-foot site is the city’s first intake center designed to address trauma-related needs for women entering the shelter system. Key features of the building include:

Capacity: 200 temporary beds for use during the relocation process.

Design: An entryway mural, floor-specific color coding, and increased natural lighting.

Accommodations: A mix of standard rooms and a limited number of private bedrooms.

The facility serves as a primary entry point where individuals are processed before being assigned to long-term shelter locations.

How to Spread the Word on the New Women’s Shelter Intake Center

One of the most important ways you can help amplify our messages is to engage with us on social media. We have created a Social Media Toolkit to help spread the word. It can be accessed here.

Relocation of the 30th Street Single Men's and Adult Family Intake Center

Beginning May 1, 2026, the 30th Street Single Men's Intake and 30th Street Adult Family Intake Center (400 East 30th Street, Manhattan) will be relocating.

The 30th Street Single Men's and Adult Family Intake Center has been in operation for many years. Due to the age of the building, the facility now requires significant infrastructure upgrades. To ensure continuity of services while work is being done, the Department of Homeless Services will transition intake and assessment operations from this location to other sites in Manhattan.

Beginning May 1, 2026:

Men's Single Adult Intake will be located at 8 East 3rd Street in Manhattan

Adult Family Intake will be located at 333 Bowery in Manhattan

In the interim, intake will continue at 30th Street through April 30, 2026. However, clients will no longer be placed in assessment beds at that location after March 16, 2026.

As applicable, please share this information with your clients and with staff across your organizations. DSS and DHS are working closely with our City and State partners to conduct a comprehensive outreach and communications effort, and additional materials will be provided in future communications - including flyers and other resources - to support this transition as they become available.

In the meantime, please:

Update any references to 30th Street Single Adult or Adult Family Intake on your websites, printed materials, or other public-facing resources to reflect these changes by April 30, 2026.

Notify partner organizations and affiliates as necessary to ensure that all those who may be impacted by these changes are appropriately informed.

These communications will continue to be used to share important updates as this transition moves forward.

ASL Direct

ASL Direct is a video calling system that provides clients who are within the Deaf and Hard of Hearing communities a way to contact HRA and communicate with an ASL Direct agent via a video phone.

Learn more about how DSS assists people who are deaf or hard of hearing including help with scheduling interpretation services for visits to HRA Centers.

Requesting a Replacement of Temporary CBIC or EBT Card

Elimination of Photo Image and Signature on Common Benefit Identification Cards (CBIC)

Common Benefit Identification Cards (CBIC)/Electronic Benefit cards (EBT) are issued by New York State. The state has decided that PA recipients/applicants’ photo and signature will no longer be included on CBIC cards issued going forward. For information regarding obtaining a photo ID, visit New York State Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) or IDNYC. For those looking to get a non-driver’s identification card through the DMV, HRA clients can download a budget letter on ACCESS HRA to receive a free Non-Driver’s ID from the DMV.

Benefit cards are sent directly to clients by mail via the State's vendor. There is no need to come into a service center to request a card or receive a replacement CBIC card. If an emergency card is needed for a new applicant who is eligible for expedited SNAP or an immediate needs grant, applicants can visit any open HRA center to request a Vault Card (temporary benefit card). Note that State photo cards cannot be issued in-person or through the mail for clients who never had their photo taken as part of the prior Automated Finger Imaging System (AFIS) process which has been eliminated by the State.

Clients can request a replacement card from the State by calling EBT Customer Service at 888-328-6399 for account information or to request that a replacement Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card for SNAP or Cash Assistance be mailed. For anyone having difficulty accessing a replacement card by phone, cards can also be requested by setting up an online EBT account. Clients can use this account to request a replacement card, check card balance, review transaction history, change a PIN, and more.

If an EBT card is lost or stolen, it must be reported to NYS EBT Customer Service right away at 888-328-6399 or ebtEDGE to disable the old card.

Replacement cards requested online or by telephone will be mailed to the address on record in 7 to 10 business days.

For the purposes of proof of identity for receipt of benefits, HRA does not require a photo ID. New York State and New York City operate a public benefits eligibility process whereby if individuals can provide a Social Security Number and the correct name and date of birth, no additional identification documentation is required. In some cases, HRA can also accept an attestation from someone who knows the individual applying for benefits.

Obtaining Temporary CIN for Clients without Social Security Number

For clients applying for benefits who do not have a social security number, the social security number of a child on the case will be used to identify the case. When an application is initially submitted through ACCESS HRA, the system is not yet able to connect the case using the SSN of the child. In these cases, when a client needs to access a case before processing has begun, they can obtain a temporary CIN as follows (this process is for use by CBOs only at this time and is not available for applicants directly):

CBOs can email the ITS HRA team at ACCESSHRASuppapp@dss.nyc.gov to ask for the temporary CIN, as an alternative if POS is not an option.

When submitting a request, CBOs should include the following information;

ACCESS HRA confirmation number for the online application submitted

Client name and date of birth

AHRA Username (can be an email address)

Immigrant Eligibility and Access Updates

Changes to SNAP Eligibility for Non-Citizens under H.R.1

On April 1, the New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Affairs (OTDA) issued guidance entitled "Changes to SNAP Eligibility for Non-Citizens under H.R.1--Preliminary Guidance" providing instructions effective immediately on how to implement new changes to SNAP eligibility as dictated in H.R.1. According to the new guidance, SNAP eligibility for noncitizens will be more limited than it has been in the past, and some groups who were previously eligible to receive SNAP will no longer be eligible. The new eligibility changes apply to those who are submitting new benefits applications or recertifying existing benefits cases – there will not be any changes to benefits received as a result of this guidance outside of those points.

Under the new SNAP eligibility rules, the only noncitizens who will be eligible to receive SNAP are:

1. Lawful permanent residents (LPRs) who either:

Have more than 5 years in qualified status;

Are under 18 years old;

Have earned or can be credited with more than 40 qualifying quarters;

Are in receipt of certain disability benefits; or

Are currently in a qualified status and were age 65 or older on 8/22/96 and were lawfully residing in the U.S. on that date.

2. Citizens of the Freely Associated States (the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau) lawfully residing in the U.S. under the Compacts of Free Association;

3. Cuban/Haitian Entrants

4. Lawful permanent residents who do not have any of the above criteria but who have entered or adjusted status based on an immigration status recognized by the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA). These statuses include:

Refugees

Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) recipients

Ukrainian parolees paroled into the U.S. between 2/24/2022 and 9/30/2024

Afghan parolees paroled into the U.S. between 7/31/2021 and 9/30/2023

Asylees

Victims of human trafficking

Individuals admitted to the United States as an Amerasian immigrant

Grantees of withholding of removal

Certain Hmong or Highland Laotian tribal members

Certain American Indians born abroad

Active Military or Veterans, if also holding status as an LPR and meeting the associated military criteria listed

Individuals with the following immigration statuses, who do NOT have any other immigration statuses had previously been potentially eligible to receive SNAP, but are no longer eligible to receive SNAP unless/until they become a lawful permanent resident and meet the relevant criteria:

Refugees

Asylees

Ukrainian parolees paroled into the U.S. between 2/24/2022 and 9/30/2024

Afghan parolees paroled into the U.S. between 7/31/2021 and 9/30/2023

Victims of Human Trafficking

Grantees of withholding of removal

Qualified battered non-citizens (including VAWA self-petitioners)

Individuals granted humanitarian parole for one year or longer

Certain Hmong or Highland Laotian tribal members

Individuals admitted to the United States as an Amerasian immigrant

Certain American Indians born abroad

Active Military or Veterans

City of New York’s Statement on Public Charge

On November 19, 2025, the federal administration announced a proposed rule change to “public charge.” The proposed change is not currently in effect.

The City of New York has issued a statement condemning the proposed rule, and affirming our commitment to serving all New Yorkers, regardless of immigration status.

We strongly condemn this proposed public charge rule, especially as immigrants increasingly face challenges to their due process.

The proposed rule would eliminate existing guidance for federal immigration officials, giving them broad discretion to deny an immigrant the opportunity to adjust their status if they use public benefits. It would allow federal officials to make rulings based on the likelihood of an immigrant’s future use of public benefits.

By the federal government’s own admission, this proposed rule will reduce access to public benefits, worsen health outcomes, and continue an anti-immigrant agenda.

Immigrant New Yorkers are essential to the city’s strength and future, and policies like this undermine the wellbeing of families who are vital to our communities and economy. All New Yorkers deserve access to health care, affordable food, and safe housing. We are monitoring the situation closely. We remain committed to serving every New Yorker, regardless of immigration or insurance status.

The City will continue to update New Yorkers as new developments unfold. If you have questions now, visit the Public Charge webpage or call MOIA’s Immigration Legal Hotline at 1-800-354-0365, Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., to access timely and trusted information and connections to City-funded, free, and safe immigration legal help.

Non-citizens and SNAP Benefits Information

As a reminder, participating in SNAP does not affect a person's immigration status and/or ability to become a United States citizen or lawful permanent resident. Applying for or receiving SNAP benefits does not make someone a public charge and will not be considered in a public charge determination. Learn more about SNAP benefits.

Applying for or receiving SNAP will not affect an individual's ability to:

Remain in the United States

Get a Green Card/Lawful Permanent Resident Status

Keep a Green Card/Lawful Permanent Resident Status

Become a United States citizen

New Yorkers can also apply for SNAP on behalf of the eligible immigrants or U.S. citizens in their family, even if they do not want to apply for benefits for themselves, without affecting their immigration status. The SNAP office is not allowed to ask for immigration documents for people who are not applying to receive benefits themselves.

Many non-citizens may be eligible for SNAP benefits if they are one of the following:

Refugees, Cuban/Haitian Entrants, Asylees, Special Immigrant Visa holders, certain Ukrainian parolees, certain Afghan parolees, Amerasian immigrants, individuals with deportation or removal withheld, Hmong or Highland Laotians, victims of human trafficking, citizens of Compact of Free Association countries, North American Indians born in Canada, and members of federally recognized tribes, honorably discharged U.S. veteran, the spouse, and unmarried dependent children, noncitizens on active duty in the U.S. military service, the spouse and unmarried dependent children

Lawful Permanent Resident (LPR) in the U.S., qualified battered noncitizens, and parolees of one year or more who either:

Have been in a qualified status for 5 years;

Are under 18 years old

Receive certain disability benefits;

Have earned or can be credited with 40 qualifying work quarters

Non-citizen benefit access quick facts

All New Yorkers are eligible to apply for benefits, regardless of immigration status.

Non-citizen parents ARE able to apply for their U.S. citizen children.

Clients do NOT need to be Legal Permanent Residents (LPRs) to qualify for benefits. Many different immigration statuses allow for certain benefits eligibility. Each case is assessed individually and in consideration of all available documents and information.

HRA provides free language services for any language a client may need (including sign language), so all clients are welcome to apply for benefits regardless of their preferred language.

DSS produces documents in the following 12 languages: Arabic, Bengali, Simplified Chinese, Traditional Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Polish, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. One of the ways that clients can indicate their language preference for written notices is through AccessHRA.

When submitting a benefits application, clients should include any and all documents that they think may be relevant to their immigration status. This includes documents that are expired, and documents issued from other countries.

Copies of documents should be legible and complete, including front and back of cards, forms, and passports (including blank pages of passports).

If clients do not have their immigration documents or have concerns relating to public charge issues, they should contact the Immigration Legal Support Hotline at 800-354-0365 or call 311 and say "Immigration Legal" for free further assistance.

We encourage clients who apply for benefits to allow HRA to make the benefits eligibility determination rather than determining their own eligibility beforehand.

If you have any concerns that an error has been made in a client's benefits eligibility related to their immigration status, please contact the DSS Office of Refugee and Immigrant Affairs (ORIA) at oria@dss.nyc.gov for assistance.

Updated Resources/Information for Immigrant New Yorkers

The Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs (MOIA) has updated resources for immigrant New Yorkers related to their rights in New York City. These include a social media toolkit and several translated booklets:

Know Your Rights with ICE

What to do after a friend or family member is detained by ICE/Immigration

Sanctuary City Laws in New York City

To ensure access to the latest versions, MOIA has also created printable resources with a QR-code leading to MOIA's website. Each QR-code one-pager, palm card, and poster has been translated and includes a specific QR-code link that opens MOIA's website in that language.

You can view and download printable versions of all of these resources as well as find them in multiple languages on MOIA's Know Your Rights page.

USCIS Budget Letters for Fee Waivers

USCIS's fee waiver process for certain applications has an option to indicate receipt of a means-tested benefit as a reason cited for requiring a fee waiver. This can be demonstrated with a budget letter from the agency administering the benefit. HRA is able to provide these letters to clients/consumers upon request, including at Centers and via ACCESS HRA.

The 4 things every budget letter for a means-tested benefit must have in order to be acceptable to USCIS for fee waiver purposes are:

The client's name

The agency's name

The name of the benefit received

The validity dates for the benefit

These validity dates do not need to include the date when the client originally began receiving benefits from the agency, the most recent recertification date is fine. The end date can either be the next recertification date or "12/31/9999" which is understood to mean indefinite. Either of these will be acceptable.

Please note that a signature is not required on these letters.
Learn more about fee waivers
Visit the HRA Immigrant Resources page

Designation of Temporary Protected Status

What is Temporary Protected Status (TPS)? What is Temporary Protected Status (TPS)?

Temporary Protected Status (TPS) allows individuals from certain countries to remain in the United States if it is unsafe for them to return to their home country due to a humanitarian emergency there. For example, the federal government may designate a country for TPS if there is an armed conflict (e.g., civil war) or a natural disaster (e.g., earthquake). TPS enables recipients to work in the United States lawfully and protects them from deportation as long as the TPS designation is in effect.

In order to receive TPS, applicants must prove that they have lived continuously in the United States since a date specified by the federal government. Countries' TPS designations come up for renewal at 6 to 18-month intervals, at which point the federal government again makes a determination about whether a given country can absorb its returning nationals safely.

Visit the USCIS website for additional information about TPS and The Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs for more details.

Benefit Eligibility for Parolees

Guidance on Providing Assistance to Ukrainians

In response to the "Additional Ukraine Supplemental Appropriations Act" passed by Congress on May 21, 2022, OTDA released a GIS Message explaining that effective May 21, 2022, Ukrainian humanitarian parolees are eligible for resettlement assistance and "other benefits available for refugees." This applies to Ukrainian nationals paroled into the US between February 24, 2022 and September 30, 2023 (this will include many participants in the Department of Homeland Security's "Uniting for Ukraine" program) and Ukrainian nationals paroled into the US after September 20, 2023 who are either 1) a spouse or child of a Ukrainian national paroled into the US between February 24, 2022, and September 30, 2023; or 2) a parent, caregiver, or legal guardian of a Ukrainian national unaccompanied minor paroled into the US between February 24, 2022, and September 30, 2023. The Ukraine Security Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2024 extended these benefits to those Ukrainian nationals paroled through September 30, 2024, but as of the date of publication, has not been extended further.

DSS clients who meet the definition in the Act would be eligible for the same level of benefits as refugees including Cash Assistance (including emergency assistance), SNAP, HEAP, and Medicaid as long as they also meet the other requirements for the programs. Once an applicant is able to show that they meet the definition of a Ukrainian parolee, they will immediately meet the noncitizen requirements for these programs. There is no 5-year waiting period for eligibility for federal benefits for this group.

Free, confidential language support, including Ukrainian interpretation, is available in all DSS/HRA locations. All applicants, regardless of immigration status, should go to their nearest Center for assistance.

This eligibility does not apply to Ukrainian nationals with any other status, or with no status, including:

Ukrainian nationals with only Temporary Protected Status (TPS). These individuals may be eligible for State funded benefits from DSS/HRA. There is no 5-year waiting period for State funded benefits

Ukrainian nationals with Legal Permanent Residence (green card holders). These individuals may be subject to a 5-year waiting period for federal benefits. But they may be eligible for State funded benefits from DSS/HRA without a 5-year waiting period

Ukrainian nationals in the US on B1/B2 visitor visas

Ukrainian nationals who were paroled into the U.S. prior to February 24, 2022 or after September 30, 2024

Undocumented Ukrainian nationals

On January 28, 2025, in keeping with the January 20, 2025 Executive Order entitled “Securing Our Borders,” USCIS paused all citizen-sponsored humanitarian parole programs including United for Ukraine/Ukrainian Humanitarian Parole. This means that during the pause new applications for such programs cannot be submitted and re-parole applications were not processed, but this does not impact anyone with a current parole under one of those programs. At this time, it is unclear whether pending applications for these programs will continue to be processed or when USCIS plans to resume sponsored parole programs. This does not have immediate implications for those who had already been granted parole under those programs. In June 2025, the administration began to process re-parole applications for those from Ukraine and it continues to do so.

Terminated Parole

If a noncitizen who had been granted parole previously received any communication from an immigration authority alerting them that their parole has been terminated, they may no longer be eligible to receive benefits as a parolee. If someone who has had their parole terminated has obtained or applied for a different form of immigration relief, that may enable them to remain eligible to receive certain benefits, however the terminated parole will not be used as a basis for benefits eligibility for most applicants. Cuban or Haitian nationals who have had thier parole terminated may be able to maintain their prior benefits eligibility. Even if a parole has been terminated, applicants for benefits are strongly encouraged to include any parole documentation along with all other immigration related documentation when submitting their application for benefits to ensure the most accurate benefits eligibility determination.

Afghan Humanitarian Parolees

Effective September 30, 2021, the federal government began providing evacuees from Afghanistan who entered the U.S. on humanitarian parole access to federal benefits and services through the Afghanistan Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2022. The date through which Afghan citizens or nationals habitually lived in Afghanistan has now been extended from September 2022 to September 30, 2023.

The Afghanistan Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2022 allows these individuals to receive benefits for a limited period of time. Benefits may include resettlement assistance, entitlement programs (including TA and SNAP), and other benefits available to refugees admitted under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act through March 31, 2023, or until the end of their parole term, whichever is later. These individuals are not subject to a waiting period and are immediately eligible for benefits as long as they meet all other TA/SNAP financial and non-financial eligibility requirements.

On January 28, 2025, in keeping with the January 20, 2025, Executive Order entitled “Securing Our Borders, ” USCIS paused all citizen-sponsored humanitarian parole programs including Afghan Humanitarian Parole. This means that during the pause new applications for such programs cannot be submitted, but this does not impact anyone with a current parole under one of those programs. At this time, it is unclear whether pending applications for these programs will continue to be processed or when USCIS plans to resume sponsored parole programs. This does not have immediate implications for those who had already been granted parole under those programs.

PRUCOL Safety Net Assistance Eligibility Changes

On May 12, 2023, OTDA announced new regulations impacting eligibility for Non-citizens Recognized as Permanently Residing Under Color of Law (PRUCOL) for Safety Net Assistance (SNA). The policy, which took effect upon publishing, expanded the pool of non-citizens who are considered PRUCOL for the purposes of Safety Net Cash Assistance (SNCA). As a reminder, PRUCOL is not an immigration status, but a public benefit category used for the purposes of Safety Net Assistance Eligibility.

The new categories of noncitizens now eligible to receive SNCA include:

Applicants for Asylum, regardless of employment authorization status

Applicants for Temporary Protected Status (TPS)

Applicants for Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA)

Applicants for Special Immigrant Juvenile (SIJ) Classification

Applicants for Adjustment of Status to Lawful Permanent Residence (LPR)

Applicants for adjustment of status to lawful permanent resident under Section 245 of the INA that the USCIS has accepted as "properly filed"

Applicants for Cancellation of Removal

Applicants for Suspension of Deportation (under former 244 of the INA)

Applicants requesting Deferred Action

Applicants for a special non-immigrant visa, including individuals applying for a K (spouse or fiancé of a U.S. citizen), S (certain non-citizens supplying critical information related to terrorism or organized crime), T (trafficking victims and their family members),[1][1] U (victims of criminal activity and their spouse/children), or V Visa (spouse and children of LPR who are in the process of immigrating to the U.S).

Persons Granted Stays of Deportation – Non-citizens who have been found deportable, but deportation is deferred for a specified period of time

Persons Granted Indefinite Stay of Deportation – Non-citizens who have been found deportable, but deportation is deferred indefinitely

Persons Granted Indefinite Voluntary Departure – Relief that was granted before April 1997 to non-citizens who have been found deportable, but deportation is deferred indefinitely

Persons Granted Suspension of Deportation pursuant to former Section 244 of the INA (Non-citizens in this category have been found deportable, have met a period of continuous residence and have filed an application for the EOIR to suspend deportation, which has been granted.)

Persons on whose behalf an immediate Relative Petition has been approved and family members covered by the petition (Non-citizens who are immediate relatives (spouse, father, mother, or unmarried child) of a U.S. citizen/LPR who has filed an I-130 Relative Petition on their behalf).

On July 10, 2024 NY State Dept of Health published GIS 24 MA/06 which extends eligibility for PRUCOL Medicaid. The GIS indicates that if a noncitizen consumer has received a denial from a federal immigration agency in response to an application or request for immigration relief but has not been put into removal proceedings within 15 business days of receipt of the denial, the consumer is then eligible for PRUCOL Medicaid.

Additionally, if a noncitizen consumer has had an encounter with federal immigration agencies and has received an I-385 Alien Booking Record, I-862 Notice to Appear, and/or I-220A Order of Release on Recognizance but no other documents AND they have not yet been placed in removal proceedings since receiving that document(s), that consumer is eligible for PRUCOL Medicaid as well.

On December 18, 2024, NY State Dept of Health published GIS 24_MA/09 further extending eligibility for PRUCOL Medicaid for noncitizen consumers who have had an encounter with federal immigration agencies and who are in removal proceedings if their hearing is scheduled to occur more than a year into the future.

ACCESS HRA

ACCESS HRA Technical Assistance Available through the “Contact Us” Form

Clients and applicants experiencing technical issues with the ACCESS HRA website or mobile apps can request help using the “Contact Us” link at the bottom of the ACCESS HRA webpage. Community providers may also submit requests on behalf of clients.

The form will request certain details (such as ACCESS HRA username, confirmation number, and a description of the issue). However, the Help Desk may need additional information to fully investigate. When they follow up, please be prepared to share:

The ACCESS HRA account “Username” or “Email Address” used to log in

A screenshot or the full text of any error messages

A brief description of the steps taken before the issue occurred (e.g., which button or link was clicked)

The case number or ACCESS HRA confirmation number, along with the client’s full name and date of birth

A concise description of the issue

Device type (Computer, iPhone, Android, etc.) and operating system version

Note: This form is only for technical support. It should not be used for case inquiries or application status questions.

Get Case Information & Submit Requests Quickly Using ACCESS HRA

Many clients experience long wait times when they call the DSS OneNumber to get information about or request changes to their case.

A quick and easy way for clients to get information about and manage their case is by using ACCESS HRA. ACCESS HRA is HRA’s online benefits portal and mobile app for New York City residents. Best of all, ACCESS HRA is available 24/7!

Clients who have an ACCESS HRA account that is connected* to their HRA case profile can:

View information about their HRA case(s), such as their:

Application or case status

Notices and upcoming appointments

Payments made to their landlord or utility company

Payments made to their SNAP or Cash Assistance cases to buy food or other approved items

See a list of documents that:

HRA needs from them

They uploaded using the ACCESS HRA mobile app in the last 100 days

They submitted to HRA in the last 60 days that have been added to their case record

Request a budget letter

Update their contact information

Make changes to their case information

*Connecting an ACCESS HRA account to an HRA case profile takes less than 5 minutes!

After a client logs in to their ACCESS HRA account, they should click the “Find My Case” button on the My Benefit Dashboard page and fill in the information on the Complete Account Setup page. They’ll be asked to provide information of the person who was listed as the head of their case, including Social Security Number (SSN), ID Number (CIN), Fair Fares ID Number, and Date of Birth. This information is used to locate their HRA case(s). If the adult on the case doesn’t receive benefits, they will need to enter information for any child on the case.

If a client doesn’t already have an ACCESS HRA account, they can create one and then connect it to their HRA case profile. Follow the steps below to get started.

Navigate to the ACCESS HRA landing page on the online portal or mobile app.

Click on “Create Account” and follow the onscreen instructions.

Log in to their newly created ACCESS HRA account and follow the steps on the Complete Account Setup

Helpful resources related to ACCESS HRA:

ACCESS HRA User Guide: Includes instructions on setting up an account, the many features within the ACCESS HRA online portal and mobile app, and much more.

HRA website ACCESS HRA page: Includes links to various ACCESS HRA FAQs, instructional videos, and the ACCESS HRA brochure.

ACCESS HRA navigation guide: Provides information about how to navigate the ACCESS HRA portal.

ACCESS HRA Child Support Mobile App

Reminder: Child Support Mobile App

The NYC ACCESS HRA Child Support Mobile App is an easy and convenient way for parents and guardians with a child support case or who want to open one, to access child support services offered by the NYC HRA Office of Child Support Services (OCSS).

One of the most popular features is the online payments capability. Parents can pay their child support through the app using a credit card, debit card, or PayPal without incurring any fees. Two to three business days are required for payment processing.

Some of the other features of the mobile app are:

Simplified and quick child support enrollment process

Ability to scan and upload documents

Ability to complete debt reduction forms that can be emailed

Complete enforcement actions challenge forms that can be emailed

Maintain contact information

Access HRA appointment information

To learn more about the Child Support App, visit nyc.gov/childsupportmobile and watch tutorial videos at bit.ly/mobileapptutorials. Download the app for free from the App Store or Google Play.

Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) Mobile App Updates

While the initial release of the Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) mobile app made it easier for custodial parents and guardians to enroll in the program, subsequent updates offered features designed to simplify child support processes for parents who pay support.

One fundamental form that was recently added to the mobile app is the Affidavit of Net Worth, which is required for multiple processes.

At times, many noncustodial parents choose to challenge administrative enforcement actions taken against them. The mobile app allows them to complete and submit forms for:

Federal or state tax refund intercepts

Driver's license or professional license suspensions

Withholding too much additional income

Frozen bank accounts or certain property liens

Credit reporting information

Denials of passport applications or renewals

The app also allows noncustodial parents to fill out and submit forms for key services to reduce or avoid debt. These include applications to OCSS’ our Arrears Credit and Arrears Cap programs and forms for the Modifying Orders Through Stipulation (MOTS) program. Parents whose driver's license was suspended for not paying child support can also access the form needed to enter into a payment agreement.

Please note: Negative case actions may be taken if clients do not return referral forms and/or comply with their interview. OCSS staff will make two attempts to reach the client by telephone to conduct the interview.

OCSS no longer restores Cash Assistance grants and Medicaid cases for clients who have a Child Support sanction. Clients must comply with the child support program, or they will be sanctioned.

For many of these forms, noncustodial parents can also submit supporting documentation through the app as well. Once we receive a noncustodial parent's submission is received by HRA, they are contacted to discuss any necessary next steps.

Simplifying Processes for Custodial Parents

Alongside other improvements to the enrollment experience for Cash Assistance clients, the mobile app updates give custodial parents applying for or receiving Cash the ability to link their Cash case with their one for child support. Giving custodial parents direct access to notices and appointment information related to child support is intended to make it easier for Cash clients to track their case and minimize the stress that often accompanies the application and referral process.

Custodial parents, whether receiving Cash Assistance or not, can also now update their contact information using the app—especially beneficial for parents whose housing is unstable.

How to Download the App

Go to nyc.gov/childsupportmobile to download the app or visit the App Store (Apple) or Google Play (Android). The app uses the same login information as ACCESS HRA for those who already have login credentials.

ACCESS HRA System Updates

As part of the switch to OMNY, the NYC Department of Social Services – Human Resources Administration (DSS HRA) is pleased to announce the following ACCESS HRA updates went live on Saturday, February 15, 2025:

Clients will receive a new OMNY card for their subways and eligible buses discount one of several ways via the ACCESS HRA Fair Fares portal:

Selecting the subways and eligible buses discount type in a Fair Fares enrollment application

Selecting the subways and eligible buses discount type in a Fair Fares renewal

Reporting a MetroCard lost or stolen

Switching discount type from Access-A-Ride to subways and eligible buses

Completing the new ‘Switch Fair Fares Discount from MetroCard to OMNY’ form found in the Quick Links section of the portal homepage

Other OMNY-Related Fair Fares Portal Enhancements:

Brand new re-designed Fair Fares portal homepage for OMNY clients

Viewable OMNY card information

New OMNY card statuses

OMNY card expiration date

OMNY card serial number and transit account number (TAN)

New links to open and manage an OMNY account and reload card

New ‘Card is Damaged’ option for clients reporting a card issue

New Fair Fares and OMNY help section

New and improved alerts and messaging for greater clarity on case activity

New functionality for clients to re-use previously issued Fair Fares OMNY card

Clients who have an unexpired FF OMNY card on file can choose to re-use this card at application, renewal, or when switching discount types from Access-A-Ride to subways and buses

The ACCESS HRA client portal can be found here.

To go directly to the Fair Fares NYC application or home page, go here.

We continue to offer trainings on ACCESS HRA, the Fair Fares NYC program and other topics. Community and advocacy organizations, municipal agencies, and Elected Officials' office staff can register for an upcoming session here.

ACCESS HRA User Resources

In response to questions received on our last call, answers to frequently asked questions about the use of ACCESS HRA can be found on the ACCESS HRA FAQ page. Tutorials providing assistance with use of ACCESS HRA can be found here.

ACCESS HRA and Document Upload

Clients applying for and managing their benefits are encouraged to create an account through ACCESS HRA and upload required documents through the ACCESS HRA mobile app. Watch a tutorial on how to submit documents using the ACCESS HRA mobile app.

The ACCESS HRA Mobile App is the most effective way to submit documentations to HRA. As an alternative, clients can submit documents through the NYC HRA Document Upload App without logging into an ACCESS HRA account. Clients may also submit documents via mail, fax and at an HRA Center. Click here for HRA Center Location details

The ACCESS HRA document upload is the most effective way to submit documentations to HRA. As an alternative, clients can submit documents using SNAP and Benefits Access Center RightFax, but this should only be used if clients are unable to use ACCESS HRA as it takes longer to associate these documents with a case. The fax number for submitting documents to SNAP is 917-639-2544 and is listed on the HRA SNAP Benefits webpage. If faxing documents to a Benefits Access Center, find the contact information for your local center on the HRA Benefits Access Center Locations webpage.

Remember: When submitting by fax, the process of indexing the documents to the client's case number will take more time than a submission through ACCESS HRA.

ACCESS HRA Provider Portal

The ACCESS HRA Provider Portal is a provider-facing website that allows clients to grant permission to organizations to assist with case management and be able to see case details for that client. At this time, the Provider Portal is for community-based organizations providing direct social services benefit enrollment assistance and/or ongoing case management to New Yorkers in receipt of HRA-administered benefits.

Through the ACCESS HRA Provider Portal, organizations can:

View a client’s case status and case details

Make updates to a client’s contact preferences, such as a telephone number or mailing address

Read agency notices posted to your client’s account

View a client’s appointment details

See recent documents HRA has recently received for a client’s case

Request budget letters

Receive notifications about an applicant or participant’s case, including when their recertification period begins

View a client’s account balances or recent payments made on their behalf, such as payments made to a landlord or utility company

Currently, the Provider Portal allows providers to view SNAP and Cash Assistance cases only and does not consist of a feature that allows providers to apply or submit recertifications on behalf of their clients.

Please use the following form to submit an expression of interest. Once received, we will review your submission. If approved, we will send you an onboarding packet which needs to be completed and returned in order for DSS to proceed with processing your request for Provider Portal access.

Note: Your expression of interest is subject to approval. Completion of the form alone does not guarantee that your request for access will be approved. If your request for access is denied, you will be notified. If your organization is already a member of the Provider Portal but you do not have access to your account information, email DSSOutreach@dss.nyc.gov to receive your Organization ID and instructions on how to access your organization's account.

For more information, please refer to the Provider Portal User Guide and the Provider Portal Frequently Asked Questions. You can also reach out to DSSOutreach@dss.nyc.gov with any questions.

SNAP & Cash Assistance

SNAP Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) Work Rules

Noncompliance Procedures for the SNAP ABAWD Work Requirements

As a reminder, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) participants who are subject to the Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) work requirements are allowed three months during a three-year period to receive SNAP benefits without following the work rules. When an ABAWD has not met the ABAWD work requirements or has failed to prove compliance or an exemption for three months in a 36-month period, a New York State (NYS) notice of adverse action (NOAA) will be issued before the end of the third month to inform the household that an ABAWD is ineligible for SNAP benefits in the following month.

The first possible countable month was in March, meaning that June 2026 was the first month that clients might have seen their benefits impacted if they did not comply with the work requirements in March, April, and May. At this point, noncompliant clients who have used all three countable months have lost their SNAP eligibility and either have been removed from their multi-person household, or had their single-person case closed.

For clients who wish to reestablish their eligibility, they should do the following:

Single-person households: Complete a new SNAP application (available on ACCESS HRA) and call for an eligibility interview.

Multi-person households: The Head of Case should complete a case change on ACCESS HRA to add the household member back to the case, then call for an eligibility interview and explain that they wish to add the household member back to their case.

Clients who had their SNAP benefits terminated or were removed from their household’s case due to ABAWD noncompliance can re-engage to reestablish eligibility by:

Meeting the ABAWD work requirements by working or participating in an ABAWD-qualifying work activity, or

Providing proof that they will meet the ABAWD work requirements in the next benefit month by enrolling in an ABAWD-qualifying work or community service program, or

Providing proof of an exemption from the ABAWD work requirements

Clients who are reestablishing eligibility should first re-apply for SNAP and follow the process outlined by HRA. They should not reach out to their previously assigned PACE provider. Clients will receive new PACE appointments if they are still found eligible for SNAP.

SNAP ABAWD Takes Effect March 1, 2026

As a reminder, New York’s ABAWD waiver for all counties of the State except Saratoga will end on February 28, 2026. Starting on March 1, 2026, the new ABAWD work rules enacted under the H.R.1. went into effect.

HRA will continue to screen SNAP applicants and recipients for applicable exemptions from SNAP work requirements and/or an exemption from the ABAWD time limit.

Many clients have already received the ABAWD Work Activity Letter (FIA-1021k) leading up to the March 1 ABAWD implementation date. ABAWDs should attend these appointments, where the designated PACE provider will be made aware of the waiver termination date and that tracked months for failure to comply with the ABAWD requirement will begin March 2026. This appointment is separate and apart from any other mandatory work activity appointments or assignments given as part of the individual’s Cash Assistance work assignment or SNAP E&T work assignment. During this appointment, clients will also have a chance to tell their PACE provider if they are already complying with the work requirements or believe they are exempt.

The related OTDA GIS can be accessed here.

For additional details on ABAWD work requirements, please see the ABAWD webpages maintained by NYS OTDA and NYC DSS.

Community providers can sign up for training webinars on ABAWD SNAP Work Requirements here.

New Client Notice for SNAP Work Rules Non-Compliance

The FIA-1251A (Strike Notice) is being issued to Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) participants who are subject to the Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) work requirements and do not comply with the work rules. Clients who are deemed ABAWD will receive this notice for any of the three countable months that they do not comply.

The notice will remind clients that they are allowed three months during a three-year period to receive SNAP benefits without following the work rules. HRA will count each month that they do not meet the work rules toward the three-month limit. The SNAP recipient’s benefits are not changing because of this notice, but if this is their third month of not meeting the work rules, they will receive a separate notice letting them know that their SNAP benefits will stop as a result.

If a client has received this notice, to continue to get SNAP benefits, they will need to begin to meet the work requirements or prove that they are excused from the requirements. They should contact their PACE provider or call 718-SNAP-NOW (718-762-7669) to discuss their options.

Strike Notices for noncompliance in March began issuing in April. Notices are sent by mail and are also available electronically through clients’ ACCESS HRA accounts.

Career Services Pathways for Access to Careers and Employment (PACE) On Staten Island Is Transitioning to a New Provider

The Pathways for Access to Careers and Employment (PACE) America Works of New York (AWNY) program on Staten Island will close on December 31, 2025. On January 5, 2026, the PACE program will transition to its new provider, Career Team.

Work-required applicants and participants on Staten Island will no longer be referred to PACE AWNY after December 23, 2025. The PACE AWNY program will officially close their doors on December 31, 2025.

The PACE Career Team will provide services through their site at:

60 Bay Street, Unit 710

Staten Island, NY 10301

Phone: (929) 350-1050

If clients have questions related to their assignment or provider, they may contact the Participant Services Unit (PSU) at 929-273-0574.

Birth Allowance for Beginning Year (BABY) Benefit

As of November 5, 2025, Cash Assistance (CA) participants will be awarded a one-time payment of $1800 when a newborn is added to their existing CA case within 90 days of the birth. This benefit will be issued as an unrestricted cash benefit on the client’s EBT card once the child is added to the case.

If multiple babies are born (e.g., twins, triplets, etc.), a payment of $1800 will be made for each newborn.

To receive this benefit, the household must meet the following requirements:

The baby must have been born on or after November 5, 2025

The individual or family receiving ongoing Cash Assistance must submit a case change and provide all required documentation to add the baby or babies to the case, including:

Verification of birth

Verification of citizenship

Application for a social security number

Cooperation by the parent with child support enforcement (if appropriate)

Please note that individuals must have been receiving ongoing Cash Assistance at the time of birth to receive the Baby benefit. Applying for CA after the baby’s birth does not then qualify the individual to receive the Baby benefit. Emergency assistance (e.g., the One-Shot Deal) is not considered ongoing CA.

The payment will be paid to any CA participant with a newborn added to their already active case, including a Social Security Income (SSI) parent, grandparent, relative caretaker, sanctioned parent, non-citizen parent, etc.

Clients will be notified of the payment via the notification of payment (EBT-23) notice.

Additional Notes:

The $1800 will not be used to calculate total income of the client for the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP).

Applicable clients in Residential Treatment Centers (Center 52) will receive this benefit payment as a check.

For more information or to read the full policy, click here.

Mandatory Engagement with FIA & Employment Services and Support Administration: Employment Services Providers

Engagement with HRA Employment Services and Support Administration (ESSA) providers is mandatory for Cash Assistance recipients . Employment Services offers Cash Assistance clients opportunities to learn new skills, improve their chances of connecting to careers, works closely with clients to identify opportunities that match their needs, skills, and career goals, with a goal of establishing long-term financial stability and security. Clients work with an appropriate Employment Services providers as described below. These providers will also assist clients who need them with connecting to childcare services.

CareerCompass assists clients with finding employment, training, or education programs, as well as internship and community service opportunities, to match their skills and reach their goals.

YouthPathways provides career, education, and training services for clients ages 18-24, including internships and community service opportunities tailored to their goals and needs.

CareerAdvance offers career, education, and training services in specific employment sectors, including people with limited English proficiency and older adults.

WeCAREprovides a continuum of services to help cash assistance clients and applicants with medical and/or mental health conditions that affect their employability to attain their maximum levels of self-sufficiency.

Substance Use Centralized Assessment Program (SUCAP) provides assessment and referral treatment based on client needs for clients with a substance use disorder.

Office of Reasonable Accommodations (ORA) provides a clinical review of requests for Reasonable Accommodations that support clients with physical, mental, or medical disabilities in accessing HRA programs and services. ORA clinicians review clinical documentation and make recommendations on Reasonable Accommodation requests that support clients in accessing HRA programs and services.

Cash Assistance Conciliation/Reengagement and Sanctions Process

DSS/HRA is required to institute CA sanctions for non-compliance with work-related appointments and assignments. Please note, CA recipients may resolve a sanction at any point in time by demonstrating compliance with work requirements, or by informing DSS/HRA of a reason why they are not subject to work requirements. Also, safeguards are in place to prevent a sanction, if prior to imposition, HRA’s case review finds that supportive services like childcare, transportation and reasonable accommodations were not in place and available at the time of non-compliance.

At a Conciliation/Reengagement appointment, a CA recipient will have an opportunity to:

Appeal and demonstrate that they complied with the appointment/assignment;

Explain reason(s) for non-compliance with work requirements, for example, by providing proof of current employment, or a health-related limitation, if that is the cause;

Request a new work assignment; and/or

Comply with the work requirements; or

Request a work-requirement exemption due to health limitations or other barriers to employment.

Clients are urged to communicate timely with HRA to prevent the potential decrease or termination of their CA and SNAP benefits. If the client does not appear for a Conciliation/Reengagement appointment, they will be sanctioned. Examples of sanctions required under Federal and State law are reductions or discontinuances in CA, including certain housing subsidies, and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits. Note that while CA sanctions are not durational, Federal regulations do require a minimum sanction period be enforced for SNAP. This means that the sanctioned individual will remain ineligible for SNAP until the end of the sanction period and only become eligible again if they are complying with the work requirements, or if the individual becomes exempt from SNAP work requirements. These sanctions do not impact Medicaid.

Note that sanctions are applied at the individual level. If it is a household of one, the entire case will close. If there are other individuals on the case, the individual’s line will be sanctioned, and their grant will be reduced by a prorated amount.

Clients will be notified about the importance of complying with work-related appointments and assignments, their upcoming appointments and activities. Before they are sanctioned, they will also receive a separate notice informing them of their right to request a conference with DSS/HRA and/or a Fair Hearing with NYS OTDA to prevent or remove a CA and SNAP sanction. This notice will inform them that they have 10 days before the sanction goes into effect.

Clients who have questions or concerns about their Cash Assistance or SNAP benefits and/or work requirements, can call the DSS OneNumber, at 718-557-1399.

If you have any questions about sanctions in relation to constituent services, please contact DSSOutreach@dss.nyc.gov.

Affordable Broadband Act Information and Outreach to SNAP Households

The Affordable Broadband Act (ABA) is a permanent New York State law guaranteeing discounted internet for eligible households. This law requires large internet providers to offer 25 Mbps (or more) plans for no more than $15 per month, or 200 Mbps (or more) plans for no more than $20 per month, including taxes and equipment fees (mobile and dial-up services are not included). Plans, speeds, and providers will vary by location. Clients may qualify based on household income, or if they receive SNAP, Medicaid, the Senior Citizen Rent Increase or Disability Rent Increase Exemption, HEAP, or free or reduced-price lunch through the National School Lunch program. For more information about eligibility requirements, required documents, and how to apply, click here.

SNAP clients may soon receive a text message from the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) about the availability of affordable broadband (internet) access based on the ABA.

Please inform clients that if they receive this message, it is legitimate. If they would like more information, they can either click on the link in the text message or they can go directly to https://access.nyc.gov/programs/affordable-broadband-act/. Clients can also call 311 and request “low-cost internet” for more information.

Benefits Access Center (BAC) Update for Clients with SNAP and Cash Assistance Cases

In order to expand access for all New Yorkers, HRA has moved to a universal model for both SNAP and Cash Assistance cases. NYC residents who are either new applicants or existing clients who need to visit a Benefits Access Center (BAC) or SNAP Center in person may visit any location, respectively, in the five boroughs. CA and SNAP clients are no longer assigned to specific centers unless otherwise noted. As a reminder, it is not necessary to visit a Center – New Yorkers can apply or recertify on ACCESS HRA, complete their interview by phone using on-demand, and submit documents using the ACCESS HRA mobile app.

Please note that assigned centers will no longer appear in clients’ ACCESS HRA accounts. A list of BAC and SNAP locations is available on the HRA website.

EBT Pick-Up Schedule

Below is the EBT Pick-Up Schedule. This form (EBT-52) informs applicants of when their benefits are first available to them.

Guidance on Providing Confirmation of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Participation for Household Members of Social Security Administration (SSA) Recipients

Until recently, a Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipient was required to live in a “public assistance household” to qualify for increased SSI benefits. This required all household members with whom the SSI recipient lives receive a means-tested public income-maintenance (PIM) program benefit which included receipt of Public Assistance (PA).

A rule change from the Social Security Administration (SSA) includes SNAP as one of the programs that permits a household to be considered a “public assistance household”. Additionally, instead of requiring all household members receive a PIM program benefit, the rule change now only requires that at least one other household member receives a benefit. As a result, additional households may need to confirm SNAP enrollment for a member of a household of a SSI recipient, to qualify that SSI individual for a higher SSI benefit.

A SNAP recipient living in the same household as an SSI recipient may obtain documentation to provide proof of their SNAP participation from their account in myBenefits or ACCESS HRA or by requesting a document from their local district that confirms their SNAP enrollment. The “How to Document Receipt of PA or SNAP” document provides instructions to explain how an individual may find this information in myBenefits or ACCESS HRA. SNAP recipients may then provide that information themselves to SSA to confirm the “public assistance household” status for the SSI recipient.

Verification Requirements for Household Composition and Residence Update

Cash Assistance (CA) participants can now attest to the household composition and residence for adults and minors in their household at recertification. At recertification, Cash Assistance recipients should only be asked for verification of household and residence if the information is considered questionable, such as when the household information provided during the interview conflicts with the information provided during recertification. Staff will then document the client’s attestation. For SNAP, residency must be verified during the initial application process, but at recertification the residence and household composition/size only need to be verified if questionable. These changes serve as an expansion of a prior policy update that was shared in our Community Partners newsletter dated February 3, 2023

January 2026 RSDI/SSI COLA Increases

Effective January 1, 2026, all individuals in receipt of Social Security Retirement, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (RSDI) and/or SSI will receive a federal Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) of 2.8 percent. This 2.8 percent federal COLA results in an average increase of $27 per month for SSI Recipients.

Notices were sent to all participants whose CA and/or SNAP grants will be reduced effective January 2026 because of the RSDI/SSI increase.

Separate SNAP and Medicaid benefit determinations will be made for CA cases that will be closed as a result of the COLA increase.

Increase in the New York State Minimum Wage and Its Effect on Cash Assistance and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program

Effective January 1, 2026, the NYS minimum wage increases from $16.50 to $17.00 per hour for workers employed in New York City (NYC) and the counties of Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester (the NYS minimum wage increases from $15.50 to $16.00 per hour for workers employed in the rest of NYS).

Beginning in 2027, the minimum wage will increase annually by the three-year moving average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) for the Northeast Region. Separate guidance will be issued at that time once the minimum wages are set by the Department of Labor.

Impact on CA and SNAP Work Requirements

Since the NYS minimum wage is greater than the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour, the NYS minimum wage will be used in the calculation of the maximum number of hours a participant may be assigned to certain work or community service activities. As directed by the New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA), the minimum wage that applies to workers employed in NYC will be used in the calculation.

Note: This does not apply to the eligibility requirements to receive Child Care in Lieu of Cash Assistance (CILOCA). CILOCA eligibility will be based on the appropriate minimum wage as determined by the employer’s work location.

The maximum number of monthly hours that an individual may be required to participate in certain work or community service activities is calculated by dividing the sum of the household’s monthly CA grant and SNAP grant by the minimum wage. The resulting monthly hours are divided by 4.333 to determine the maximum number of weekly hours.

Able Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD)

Individuals who are subject to the Able Bodied Adults Without Dependents (ABAWD) eligibility rules can meet their monthly ABAWD work requirements by participating in certain work or community service activities. The number of hours required is equal to their monthly SNAP grant, divided by the number of adults in the SNAP household, and then divided by the higher of the federal or NYS minimum wage.

The NYS minimum wage is used in this calculation because it is higher than the federal minimum wage. The resulting monthly hours are rounded down to the nearest whole number.

For ABAWDs who are also in receipt of CA benefits, only the SNAP grant is used in the ABAWD hours calculation.

Note: New York City has an ABAWD waiver in effect through February 28, 2026.

Despite the changes to the NYS minimum wage in 2026, the number of monthly hours that an ABAWD would need to participate in certain work experience and community service activities to meet the ABAWD requirements will either remain the same or decrease as a result of the changes (see examples below).

Example 1:

SNAP household of one individual that receives a monthly SNAP grant of $298.00.

$298.00 divided by $17.00 (2026 minimum wage) = 17 monthly hours.

$298.00 divided by $16.50 (2025 minimum wage) = 18 monthly hours.

Example 2:

SNAP household of two individuals that receive a monthly SNAP grant of $546.00.

$546 divided by 2 individuals divided by $17.00 (2026 minimum wage) = 16 monthly hours.

$546 divided by 2 individuals divided by $16.50 (2025 minimum wage) = 16 monthly hours

The 2026 increase in the NYS minimum wage has no impact on the exemption from SNAP work requirements for receiving weekly earnings of at least 30 times the federal minimum wage because the federal minimum wage is remaining at $7.25 per hour. The federal minimum wage is used to determine exemptions from SNAP work requirements.

Temporary Assistance (TA)

Health Care Worker Bonus payments received by eligible individuals are excluded as income when determining eligibility for Cash Assistance. In addition, the bonus payment(s) are also excluded as a resource for Cash Assistance and emergency assistance.

The Health Care Worker Bonus payment(s) is also excluded as a lump sum for the month of receipt of the bonus payment(s) and the following two months.

For example, if a household receives the bonus payment(s) in April 2023, the district must not count it as income or a resource for April and must exempt it as a countable resource for May and June. In July, if the household has remaining funds from the bonus payment(s), the district must count the remaining funds as a resource.

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

For SNAP, any Health Care Worker Bonus paid to individuals are excluded from consideration as income. For any household subject to a resource test, these payments are considered countable resources in the month received and in subsequent months as long as they remain readily available to the household.

Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP)

Health Care Worker Bonus payments are excluded as countable income and liquid resources for HEAP eligibility determinations.

Cash Assistance Allowance for Infant Safe Sleep Essentials

Cash Assistance (CA) Allowance for Infant Safe Sleep Essentials

Effective immediately, families with infants may be eligible to receive a Cash Assistance (CA) allowance through the establishment of a home/furniture grant request to assist them in obtaining essential items, such as a crib or pack & play, fitted sheets for a crib or a pack & play, and a wearable sleep sack/blanket, needed for safe sleep under New York State requirements.

More than 120 infants die each year in New York State from sleep related causes even though infant death due to unsafe sleep practices is preventable. Unsafe sleep practices may include infants sleeping in places other than cribs, bassinets, or pack & plays, such as adult beds, baby slings, car seats, couches, or armchairs. Infants sleeping with other children or adults, or with blankets or other loose bedding, is also considered unsafe. Many families may not have the resources necessary to obtain items that would ensure infants are sleeping alone, such as a crib or pack & play.

Educational material and additional information regarding safe sleeping practices can be found on the New York State Department of Health (DOH) webpage.

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Fiscal Year 2026 Cost-of-Living Adjustments (COLA) and Changes in Standards

SNAP recipients will see an increase in their monthly benefit allotment beginning on October 1, 2025. Under the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008, updated SNAP standards are issued annually to provide for a cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) to maximum allotments, income eligibility standards, and deductions.

The maximum SNAP benefit allotments by household size are listed below:

Household Size

Current Amount

New Amount

Amount Changed

1

$292

$298

+ $6

2

$536

$546

+ $10

3

$768

$785

+ $17

4

$975

$994

+ $19

5

$1,158

$1,183

+ $25

6

$1,390

$1,421

+ $31

7

$1,536

$1,571

+ $35

8

$1,756

$1,789

+ $33

Each

additional

person

$220

$218

- $2

New SNAP standards will go into effect on October 1, 2025. These changes are a result of federally required changes to the following standards and deductions. The information below outlines the new standards:

The Standard Deduction for households of one to three persons is $209.

The Standard Deduction for households of four persons is $223.

The Standard Deduction for households of five persons is $261.

The Standard Deduction for households of six persons or more is $299.

The SNAP Maximum Excess Shelter Deduction is $744.

The SNAP Maximum Homeless Shelter Deduction is $198.99.

The Boarder/Lodger Exclusion is $298 for one person and $546 for two persons

The standard deduction amounts that are now used in the annual SNAP mass re-budgeting effective October 1, 2025, are linked below.

The minimum allotment for one and two-person households is $24.

The new Standard Utility Allowance (SUA) amounts for NYC, as of October 1, 2025 are:

Heating/Air Conditioning SUA

Old SUA : $1,034

New SUA : $1,062

Basic Utility SUA

Old SUA : $408

New SUA : $419

Phone SUA

$32

These changes may affect the amount of SNAP benefits New Yorkers get. Depending on their individual circumstance, the amount of their monthly SNAP benefit may not change, or it may decrease or increase as a result of these changes.

Learn more about updated federal poverty levels and October 2025 changes to SNAP.

*Reporting Rules: Most SNAP households with income only have to report changes every six months. Every six months, the household either will be asked to recertify or will be mailed a form for them to use to report changes. The one exception to this rule is if the household's gross monthly income becomes more than 130% of the federal poverty level. Gross income includes all income any member of the household receives during the calendar month before taxes and other deductions are taken out.

Get more information about updated federal poverty levels and changes to SNAP

Pilot Program for SNAP Access for New Yorkers Being Released from State Prisons

HRA received requested waivers from the State OTDA and the USDA allowing individuals incarcerated in State prisons to apply for benefits while incarcerated, including conducting application interviews, which is currently prohibited by New York State regulation. This common-sense reform, which the State allowed us to initially implement at two State prisons (Queensboro Correctional Facility and Edgecombe Residential Treatment) has now been expanded to five additional facilities (Bedford Hills, Taconic, Greene, Fishkill and Sing Sing). This effort will ensure individuals who were formerly incarcerated are better supported as they re-enter society. Individuals leaving State prisons can connect with the benefits they need pre-release rather than having to first begin the application process after release. This pilot was developed in partnership with the National Executive Council (NEC) at Columbia University's Center for Justice and the New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision.

Time Period Limit to Access Benefits

In response to questions received on our Community Partners call, below is information confirming the length of time that benefits remain available in accordance with federal and State requirements:

SNAP Benefits (Food Stamps)

SNAP Benefits are issued to an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) SNAP Benefits account on the same date each month. If benefits remain unused on an EBT SNAP Benefits account for 274 consecutive days, the benefits will fall into expungement status. This means that any SNAP Benefits that have been available in an account for at least 274 days will be expunged (removed). Expunged SNAP Benefits cannot be replaced/reissued.

Cash Assistance

Cash benefits are available to the recipient as long as there is activity in the account. If there is no account activity for 90 days, the remaining benefits are expunged without notice. Regardless of activity, a cash benefit must be entirely withdrawn by the recipient within 90 days of its availability date. The client may request a reissuance only of the expunged cash benefit for which they are eligible.

Regardless of activity, a cash benefit must be entirely withdrawn by the recipient within 180 days of its availability date. The remaining balance of the 180-day cash benefit will be expunged from the account without notice to the recipient.

How to Apply for or Recertify SNAP and Cash Assistance Benefits

Reminder about Cash Assistance Paper Applications

As a reminder, clients can apply for Cash Assistance benefits though ACCESS HRA without the need to visit an HRA Benefits Access Center (BAC) in person. Clients have the option to also apply at a BAC in person if preferred, or by mail by printing the most up-to-date forms, including current application (LDSS-2921) or recertification (LDSS-3174), which can be found on both the OTDA Applications Webpage and the HRA CA Application and Recertification Kit.

Please ensure that any printed applications available to clients at your community sites have a revision date of 07/23 or later.

SNAP and Cash Assistance Applications/Recertifications

Applications and recertifications can be submitted online on ACCESS HRA. Read the user guide for ACCESS HRA.

Applications can be picked up at HRA SNAP and Benefit Access Centers

To request an application or recertification form be mailed to you, call the DSS OneNumber at 718-557-1399 or download it from the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance website.

Cash Assistance Application (LDSS-2921)

Cash Assistance Recertification Form (LDSS-3174)

SNAP Application (LDSS-4826)

For completed SNAP paper applications/recertifications:

Mail to:
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
PO BOX 29008
Brooklyn, NY 11202

Drop off at an open SNAP center

Fax new SNAP applications to MARU at 917-639-1111

Fax SNAP recertifications to the Centralized Recertification Mail Unit (CRMU) at 917-639-2544*

For completed Cash Assistance applications:

Fax, mail or drop off at an open Benefits Access Center

Those unable to file an application using the methods described above may call the DSS OneNumber to set up an appointment to complete an application over the phone.

How to Return or Submit Documents for SNAP/CA Applications & Recertifications

Documents can be submitted in the following ways:

Upload documents using the ACCESS HRA mobile app.

Mail to:
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
PO BOX 29008
Brooklyn, NY 11202

Drop off at an open Benefit Access Center or SNAP Center

Fax:

For SNAP applications, fax documents to MARU at 917-639-1111*

For SNAP recertifications, fax documents to the Centralized Recertification Mail Unit (CRMU) at 917-639-2544*

*When faxing or mailing documents please be sure to write the client's name and case number on each page of the document to ensure accurate indexing.

How to close a SNAP/CA case

You can request a SNAP or Cash Assistance case closure via ACCESS HRA or by mailing/faxing a written statement requesting the case to be closed. Requests can also be made verbally by calling the DSS OneNumber 718-557-1399.

One Shot Deals/Emergency Grants

One Shot Deal (OSD) – Eligibility

Eligibility for a One-Shot Deal is not contingent on being sued for rent arrears. Please reference and share the One Shot Deal Guide/FAQs (English, Spanish), which makes it clear that an eviction case is not required to receive a One Shot Deal. In September, HPD shared this information with their citywide landlord contacts. Other limitations on the provision of these grants are set by State statute and regulations, including the repayment agreement requirement that we have asked the State to waive during the continuing public health emergency. An applicant does not have to appear on the lease or be the primary tenant to apply for a One-Shot-Deal. However, RAU may ask for written confirmation that the individual will be able to reside in the household for a period of time after the OSD as a condition of eligibility. HRA continues to process One-Shot Deal applications for rental and utility arrears.

Applying for an Emergency Assistance Grant (One-Shot Deal)

Below are instructions for applying for Cash Assistance/Emergency Grants (One-Shot Deal) through ACCESS HRA. We encourage providers and advocates to sign up for the ACCESS HRA trainings offered by the DSS Office of Community Outreach for additional information on using our online tools, including how to apply for an emergency grant (One-Shot Deal). View the webinar options.

To apply for Cash Assistance or a one-time emergency grant (One Shot Deal), clients will need to take the following steps:

Visit ACCESS HRA and log-in

Select the 'Benefits' link from the menu options on the homepage

Select 'Start a New Application'

Select the 'Cash Assistance' option in the 'Select Application' page

Identify any applicable emergency indicators and click 'Next'

Select the type of benefits you would like to apply for
The three options are: Cash Assistance, One Shot Deal, or Child Care without Cash Assistance (CILOCA). If the need is for emergency assistance and ongoing assistance, select the Cash Assistance option.

Complete and submit the application

Follow instructions in the ACCESS HRA confirmation page and submit required documents using the ACCESS HRA Mobile App

Clients with an active Cash Assistance case can submit a special grant request for things like rent or utility arrears via ACCESS HRA. To submit a Cash Assistance Special Grant Request, clients will need to:

Visit ACCESS HRAand log-in

Enter identifying information to 'Find My Case' and link to HRA case

Select 'View Case' in the ACCESS HRA user home page

Select 'Request Special Grant,' located on the left-hand side

Identify the special grant being requesting, complete the request and submit

Follow instructions in confirmation and submit required documents using the ACCESS HRA Mobile App

All applications and requests for emergency assistance are evaluated on an individual case-by-case basis.

Emergency Grants for Clients Receiving Cash Assistance

In response to questions we've received on our Community Partners call, clients with open cash assistance cases can request additional allowance or emergency benefit(s) beyond their regular monthly benefits, if necessary. In these instances, clients should not submit a new one-shot-deal application, and should instead utilize the various grants available for request through ACCESS HRA.

One Shot Deal (OSD) – Repayment and Appeals

Not all emergency grants require repayment. As part of the application process, if rent arrears or utility arrears are identified, clients are asked to sign a State-required repayment agreement at the time of application in ACCESS HRA. We do so because when the application is initially filed, HRA does not know which category of assistance the client will ultimately be eligible for, and we want to avoid the delay of having to ask clients to sign the State-required repayment agreement at the end of the process when an eligibility decision has been made and time is of the essence to prevent an eviction or maintain/restore utility services.

In particular, clients receiving SSI are not required to repay emergency grants. Clients eligible for Emergency Assistance to Needy Families (EAF) may be required to repay a portion of their EAF grant. Other clients may also be eligible for non-recoupable rent arrears or utility arrears payments under State law. These determinations are made upon review of the full application.

The repayment of OSD's is mandated at 12 months for payments related to shelter, and 24 months for payments related to utilities.

Clients who believe they fall into a category in which they should not be required to repay their OSD – even if the determination is that they are required to pay – can request a State fair hearing. Clients who received an OSD for an amount that differed from their requested amount are also entitled to a State fair hearing. However, repayment schedules and amounts for OSD's are set by State statute and cannot be addressed by a fair hearing.

One Shot Deal (OSD) – Client Identifier

In response to concerns raised by community partners, to date, HRA is now printing the names of clients on the check stub for One Shot Deal rental payments so that housing advocates can able to link the check with the client. This was done previously on checks for recurring payments and is now available for OSD checks as well.

SNAP Resource Policy Update

Households that contain an aged or disabled individual that have gross income in excess of 200% of the federal poverty limit can still be eligible for SNAP benefits if the household's net income does not exceed 100% of the federal poverty limit and the household's countable resources do not exceed current resource limit. For the limited number of income-eligible households subject to the SNAP resource limits, all resources (if any) must be evaluated to determine whether they can be counted toward the SNAP resource limit.

On October 1, 2024, the SNAP resource limit increased to:

$4,500 for households that contain at least one person who is aged (60 years of age or older) or disabled

$3,000 for all other households which are subject to the resource test.

As a reminder, households categorically eligible to receive SNAP benefits are not subject to the SNAP resource limits. Within the New York State expansion of categorical eligibility (effective January 1, 2008), resources are not considered when determining the eligibility of almost all income-eligible SNAP households.

The only income-eligible households subject to SNAP resource limits are households containing individuals who are disqualified from receiving SNAP benefits due to an intentional program violation (IPV), or sanction, and households that contain an aged or a disabled individual and have gross income in excess of 200% of the federal poverty limit.

Emergency Assistance for Families (EAF) Eligibility

In response to questions received on Community Partners call, below we have outlined eligibility criteria for Emergency Assistance for Families (EAF). EAF is a federally-funded program dedicated to meeting the emergency needs of families with children. Applicants who need emergency assistance with rent arrears or utility arrears may be eligible for an EAF/One-Shot Deal payment to prevent eviction or foreclosure, or utility disconnect. HRA will evaluate households for EAF eligibility at the time of application for emergency assistance or a rental subsidy program.

The applicant household must contain either

An individual with a medically verified pregnancy;

or a child under the age of 18;

or an individual age 18 and attending full-time secondary school or the equivalent level of vocational or technical training

The child must be currently living with an adult related by blood, marriage, or adoption

The child, parents, or other eligible relatives must be without immediately accessible resources necessary for meeting their needs, and those needs cannot be met by an advance allowance

The child must be requiring emergency assistance to provide living arrangements for them in a home

The emergency could not have been foreseen by the applicant and was not under their control

Financial Eligibility for EAF

Gross available income of the applicant on the date of application must be at or below 200% of the poverty level for that household size

These standards DO NOT apply to households receiving child protective, child preventative, or any other child welfare services paid for under EAF (such households must, however, include one member in receipt of CA or SSI and/or SSP at the time of EAF determination)

The applicant must be without the resources to meet the emergency need (income, money on hand, bank accounts, etc.)

Individuals can file an application for emergency assistance/One-Shot Deal and/or get more information using ACCESS HRA.

Click here for detailed information on the grants and programs available which include Emergency Assistance Grants like One Shot Deals and Special Grants for active Cash Assistance cases, FHEPS and CityFHEPS rental assistance programs and Homebase services. Feel free to share and refer to the following supporting documents:

Landlord/Property Owner Letter

One Shot Deal Guide/FAQs (English, Spanish)

Repayment and EAF

If a household is found eligible for EAF, they may still be required to repay a portion of the EAF grant. If rent arrears exceed the monthly shelter allowance for public assistance, then the excess portion of the grant is subject to repayment. Utility arrears paid with EAF may be recoverable if the household's gross monthly income on the date of repayment is more than the monthly standard of need for public assistance.

Emergency assistance grants /One-Shot Deals are also available for single adults and childless couples.

SNAP Eligibility for Children Receiving Social Security Income (SSI)

In response to a question received on our community call, we want to clarify how SNAP eligibility would be determined for a child in receipt of SSI. A child receiving SSI would not be eligible for their own SNAP case, but would be considered a mandatory household member with their parent/guardian. Both the SSI income and the income of their parents/guardians would be included in the budgeting and eligibility determination for their household.

Cash Assistance & Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Application/Recertification Interviews On-Demand Guidance

HRA now offers on demand interviews for all new applicants and existing recipients for Cash Assistance & the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP ). Clients receive instructions to contact the on-demand call center in Cash Assistance related correspondence from HRA as well as in ACCESS HRA when submitting a new application or recertification.

SNAP On-Demand Interviews: 718-SNAP-NOW (718-762-7669) 8:30 AM- 5:00 PM, Monday - Friday

Cash Assistance On-Demand Interviews: (929-273-1872) 8:30 AM- 5:00 PM, Monday - Friday

To minimize the time a client waits on hold, the SNAP/CA on demand system allows callers to request a call back rather than wait on hold. This option will keep a caller's place in line and they will receive a call back for their interview when the call center reaches their place in the queue.

The Office of Community Outreach/DSS-HRA developed a comprehensive guide for community partners to better assist clients with their Cash Assistance (CA) or Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) application phone interview requirement. This resource provides helpful insight and best practices for system use with an emphasis on the benefits of the call-back feature.

The guide can be accessed here and can be ordered for distribution and use on the DSS Design and Print Ordering System (DPOS). Please note that the resource can be found in the "SNAP and Food Program" section of the Outreach Catalog. The easiest way to locate the document is by entering "FLY-1152" in the "Search Product" field.

Community Partners interested in ordering materials from HRA and ordering for the first time, should email DPOS (Design and Print Ordering System) Customer Service at DPOSCustomerService@dss.nyc.gov to have their organization/agency registered in the system. Once completed, the requestor will receive an email with a link to create an account, allowing their organization/agency the ability to order from HRA's catalog.

Organizations and agencies with already existing DPOS accounts, should log into their account using the appropriate link below:

For other NYC Agencies: https://nycdssagencies.myprintdesk.net/

For (CBO) NYC DSS Partners: https://nycdsspartners.myprintdesk.net/

Clients who have questions regarding an existing application or case should continue to visit the ACCESS HRA website at nyc.gov/accesshra or call the DSS OneNumber (Infoline) at 718-557-1399.

Availability of Two Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) Cards to Certain SNAP Households

Certain SNAP households are permitted to have two EBT cards per case with access to their SNAP benefits. To request the second EBT card, the Head of Household must complete the FIA-1270 form for the other adult in the household. This form can be returned as follows:

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program

PO BOX 29008

Brooklyn, NY 11202

Fax number: 917- 639-1111

For a SNAP household to be eligible for a second EBT card, the SNAP household must include two parent(s)/guardian(s) who:

Are both on the SNAP case,

Live in the household full-time, and

Are over the age of 18 or, regardless of age, are a parent/guardian of a minor child.

Once a household submits the FIA-1270, the request will be reviewed and processed within 30 calendar days. The SNAP Head of Household may request the second card be deactivated at any time without the consent of the second cardholder by completing the W-607A form.

The second card does not entitle a SNAP household to any additional SNAP benefits. Both EBT cards are associated with the household's SNAP case and transactions made using either card will draw down from the same SNAP account. The second EBT card will contain the payee/head of household's name and the name of the second parent/guardian in the household. Each card will have its own card number.

SNAP households are only permitted a maximum of two active EBT cards per case. If a two-parent(s)/guardian(s) household already has an authorized representative card issued, they cannot request an additional card for the second parent/guardian. Similarly, if the two-parent(s)/guardian(s) household receives a second EBT card for the parent/guardian, they will be unable to request an additional card for an authorized representative.

SNAP & P-EBT Targeted Text Outreach – New Sender Short Code Phone Number

As of April 25, 2023, the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) is using the new short code phone number "696832" to send all future SNAP and P-EBT related text messages to households.

Since 2020, OTDA has employed largescale text blasts to inform households of P-EBT issuances, as well as the termination of supplemental SNAP Emergency Allotments. The most recent targeted text effort sent messages from 877-902-0684. Moving forward, text messages are no longer being sent from 877-902-0684, and is instead being sent from the short code "696832." Messages received from the short code phone number "696832" are legitimate and not a scam or spam.

Cash Assistance (CA) Earned Income Disregard (EID)

Earned Income Disregard Effective June 2026

Earned Income Disregard (EID) refers to when income earned by a recipient of Cash Assistance benefits is not counted when determining their benefit amount. The EID is applicable to all CA households with earned income. It is applied to earnings up to the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) for households residing in temporary housing and applied to all earnings for all other CA households.

Effective June 1, 2026, the EID increased from 64% to 65%. The work expense disregard will remain at $150 per month. The 2026 semi-monthly poverty levels are listed below by household size.

Note: Certain CA participants whose income is below 200% of the FPL for their CA household size can have all their earnings disregarded once in a lifetime for a period of up to six straight months when they report a new job or when they are in an approved training program and receiving payment for that training.

Reminder: Based on policy changes that were included in the enacted 2022-23 New York State budget, effective October 1, 2022:

The 185% Gross Income Test (GIT) and the Poverty Level Test were eliminated;

The eligibility to receive the EID was expanded to all households with earned income; and

The budgeting methodology was changed to apply the EID prior to the work expense disregard.

Earned Income Disregard (EID) Flyers

The Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) has designed flyers to increase awareness of income disregards available to Public Assistance (PA) recipients.

See the links below to access the flyers.

For Clients:

Start a Job Increase Your Income Keep Your Benefits (Flyer) (5263)

Spanish (5263-SP)

Learn, Earn, and Keep Your Benefits (Flyer) (5264)

Spanish (5264-SP)

For Workforce Development & Community Partners:

100% Earned Income Disregards for Public Assistance Recipients (5249)

Spanish (5249-SP)

Cash Assistance Six-Month Mailer Recertification Waiver

The State OTDA approved the City's request to waive the regulation requiring households in receipt of Cash Assistance to complete the six-month mail-in recertification if the household is identified as having no earned income in order to maintain eligibility for CA benefits.

These households are still required to complete a recertification once every twelve (12) months and to report any changes to the household circumstances (composition, income, etc) within ten (10) days of the change.

Households receiving CA will be reminded of their 10-day reporting requirement by HRA in the first month they would normally receive their 6-month mailer. The notice also provides information on how they can submit changes to their circumstances to the agency.

Additional Food Assistance Programs

Opening of Green Cart Permit Waiting Lists

The NYC Health Department is offering mobile food vending Green Cart permits for the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Staten Island. This permit allows vendors to sell fresh fruits and vegetables — including prepackaged sliced and cut fruits and vegetables — bottled drinking water, and plain nuts.

To get a Green Cart permit, applicants must have a valid Mobile Food Vending License and submit the Green Cart Waiting List Application Form to join a waiting list. The waiting list application can be completed at any time. To fill out the waiting list application, visit nyc.gov/greencarts.

When Green Cart permits become available for Queens and Manhattan, the NYC Health Department will make an announcement. For more information, visit nyc.gov/greencarts.

Restaurant Meals Program (RMP)

The Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA), established a Restaurant Meals Program intended to allow certain households who may not have access to proper food storage and preparation or who may not be able to prepare meals themselves, to use their Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits to purchase prepared meals at participating restaurants at a discounted rate. The program, which began in Monroe County in December 2023 and expanded to all five boroughs of New York City in 2024, has now expanded to a statewide program.

Households using SNAP benefits to purchase meals at participating restaurants receive a 10% discount on the cost of their meal. When purchasing prepared meals at participating restaurants, households will be responsible for covering the entire, discounted cost of their meals.

A list of participating restaurants in NYC can be found here and will be updated as new restaurants are onboarded.

To be eligible to purchase prepared meals at restaurants participating in the RMP, all members of the SNAP household must be either:

elderly (age 60 or older).

have a disability as defined for SNAP (receives disability benefits from a government agency because of a disability considered permanent).

experiencing homelessness (including those residing in shelter); or

the spouse of a SNAP participant who is eligible for RMP

There is no separate application process for SNAP households to participate in the RMP. RMP eligibility is established systemically by HRA/DSS by the presence of certain attributes on the household’s SNAP case, such as age of all household members, the Aged/Disabled indicator, the Shelter Type code, and the Relationship indicator.

SNAP household that are eligible to participate in the RMP have their benefit case automatically updated with an RMP indicator. This means that eligible households may purchase food/meals at participating restaurants without having to make any changes or updates to their cards.

Households identified as RMP eligible will receive notices from HRA letting them know that their household may participate in the RMP. Conversely, when a household who previously participated in the RMP no longer meets the criteria to participate due to a change in circumstances, a notice will be issued to explain that the household is no longer eligible for the RMP.

All SNAP households can confirm their own RMP eligibility status by visiting ebtEDGE and creating or logging into their account. If the household is creating a new ebtEDGE account, they will need their CBIC/EBT card number, PIN, and an email address.

Once logged into the home page, in the “Account Information” section, the cardholder will see a thumbs up icon with “Account is Restaurant Meal Program Eligible” if the household is eligible for the RMP. If the household is not eligible for the RMP, the “Account is Restaurant Meal Program Eligible” message will not be present in the “Account Information” section.

Note: Applicants/Participants can also see the eligibility message for RMP on the ebtEDGE Mobile App.

Since clients will be using their SNAP benefits, they should check their SNAP benefit balance by calling 1-888-328-6399 or visiting ebtEDGE to ensure that they have sufficient funds in their SNAP EBT account prior to purchasing a meal at a participating restaurant.

If a household meets the criteria to participate in the RMP and attempts to purchase a prepared meal but does not have sufficient funds to cover the entire, discounted cost of their meal, the household will be responsible for covering any remaining balance with funds other than SNAP benefits.

If a household does not meet the criteria to participate in the RMP and attempts to use their SNAP benefits to purchase a prepared meal at a participating restaurant, the transaction will be declined, the household will not be eligible for the RMP discounted rate and will be responsible for covering the full cost of their meal with funds other than SNAP benefit.

For more information on the Restaurant Meal Program, click here

For restaurant owners who would like to learn more, click here. Restaurant owners that are interested in enrolling into the program should contact NYSRMP@otda.ny.gov.

"Find Food Support" Website

Find Food Support is a website using a Google Maps tool to help individuals locate sources of free food in their communities. Google partnered with No Kid Hungry, FoodFinder, and the United States Department of Agriculture to identify more than 90,000 food support sites including food banks, food pantries, and school lunch pick-up locations across all 50 states.

NYC Food Pantry Resources

Food Assistance through the Community Food Connection (CFC)

As a reminder, information regarding emergency food services, including food banks, is available via our Food Assistance webpage. The Community Food Connection (CFC), formerly known as the Emergency Food Assistance Program (EFAP), provides funding citywide to more than 700 community kitchens and food pantries. Community kitchens are available for New Yorkers who need hot meals and food pantries for those in need of groceries to cook at home.

From the Food Assistance homepage, New Yorkers can download a list of NYC Food Pantries and Community Kitchens, or call 311 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to find a food pantry or community kitchen near them. An interactive map to locate nearby food pantries can also be found through Food Help NYC. For organizations interested in working with HRA to provide food assistance, they can learn how to become a Community Food Connection provider here.

NYC Food Pantry Locator

Use the pantry locator to find locations that offer free food (food pantries and soup kitchens). Hours and locations are subject to change. It is possible additional food locations are open but not featured on this map. We recommend calling to ensure locations of interest are open.

Plentiful Food Pantry App

Plentiful Pantry App is an app that lets New Yorkers find food pantries and make reservations ahead of time. There is a map of pantries all over NYC with over 300 locations. With Plentiful, pantries can easily keep track of clients, and clients can manage pantry visits directly from their phone. Pantries use Plentiful to manage reservations and communicate with clients. Clients get reservation reminders on their phone. Plentiful was created by The New York City Food Assistance Collaborative, a coalition of public and private organizations working to alleviate hunger in New York City. Collaborative members include the NYC Mayor's Office of Food Policy, City Harvest, United Way of New York City, the New York City Human Resources Administration - EFAP, and the New York State Department of Health Hunger Prevention and Nutrition Assistance Program.

New York City Common Pantry (NYCP) Mobile Pantry

The NY Common Pantry (NYCP) Mobile Pantry Program helps to increase access to fresh produce and nutritious groceries through collaboration with community-based organizations. The program reduces food insecurity in the community by engaging families that do not have access to free food through traditional channels like food pantries and other resources by bringing food closer to where they live and by removing barriers such as transportation costs.

Please contact mobilepantry@nycommonpantry.org for Mobile Pantry site locations and additional information.

NYC Farmers Market Health Bucks and Get the Good Stuff

Health Bucks

Health Bucks are $2 coupons that can be used to purchase fresh fruits and vegetables at all NYC farmers markets. For every $2 spent at farmers markets using SNAP on an EBT card, you can get $2 in Health Bucks, up to $10 per day. Health Bucks are available year-round at NYC farmers markets that accept EBT. Learn more about the program, which is run by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.

Get the Good Stuff

New Yorkers who participate in SNAP can get free fruits, vegetables and beans at certain NYC supermarkets through Get the Good Stuff, a NYC Health Department program. For every dollar spent using SNAP benefits on eligible fruits, vegetables and beans, you can get a matching dollar (up to $10 per day) to spend on your next purchase of eligible foods. The matching dollars are added to a Get the Good Stuff pink card that is scanned at the register before payment. Learn more about the program and get store locations.

City Harvest Mobile Markets

City Harvest Mobile Markets provide free fresh produce throughout the five boroughs. The Mobile Markets are open from 9:30 to 11:30 am. Each site may have its own eligibility criteria to receive free food. See a list of Mobile Markets by borough.

Child Care & Child Support

NYC Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) Resources

Child Support in the Community Newsletter

The DSS-HRA Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) releases newsletters, featuring important updates and information. You can access the current issue, along with previous editions, here.

Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) Training Institute - Upcoming Sessions

The Office of Child Support Services Training Institute is offering free webinars on various topics related to the child support program. All providers and clients are welcome to attend these information sessions to better understand the services provided by the program. There is a full list of upcoming events in our communication and on our website.

All sessions are held virtually on Tuesdays from 10:00 to 11:00am. There is no cost for any of the webinars and each session includes a Q&A component. Links for registering can be found in our 4/16 communication or by visiting our nyc.gov/hra Child Support Services page.

For a full list of the free sessions January through June, click here: https://on.nyc.gov/ocss-ti .

If you have trouble registering for any session, please email

OCSS.TrainingInsitute@dfa.state.ny.us or visit the OCSS website at https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/child-support-services.page.

NYC Child Support Releases Biennial Report for 2023-2024

The New York City Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) has released its 2023–2024 Biennial Report. Characterizing those two years as “a time of connections,” the report combines current data with descriptions of key activities and provides an up-to-date description of child support’s more holistic service delivery model.

The report offers insights into OCSS's work to:

Deliver employment, training, and debt-reduction services to noncustodial parents

Connect parents in City shelters to much-needed child support services

Examine structural racism in the child support program through its 2023 Policy Conference

Develop a new model for delivering child support services to young parents

Communicate to parents by text and email, through webinars, and using the ACCESS HRA Child Support Mobile App

A brief overview of the child support process also makes the report a useful reference for partners interested in refreshing their understanding of this essential City program. The list of contact methods and multi-language resources at the end of the report makes it especially valuable for community-based organizations that directly serve New York City families.

Career Track: New Employment Program for Noncustodial Parents

We are pleased to introduce Career Track, a New York City employment program for noncustodial parents who have a child support case. Career Track is designed to help noncustodial parents build the necessary skills needed to find and keep work in one of several growing industries. It also offers support services that can help the parent in his or her search.

Career Track Employment Services:

A full range of services to help you find and keep a job, including:

One-on-One Career Coaching

Job Search Support

Resume Help and Interview Prep

MetroCards to help the parent get to interviews or work

Child Support Navigation

Training That Builds Your Skills:

In addition to employment services, Career Track can also connect the parent with training programs in growing industries like:

Construction

IT Support & Cybersecurity

Transportation

Healthcare Support & Operations

Green & Clean HVAC

An interested noncustodial parent can email careertrack@hra.nyc.gov. They should include their name, phone number and the best time for a Career Navigator to contact them.

Career Track is an exciting new partnership between DSS Office of Child Support Services, Career Services and CUNY.

OCSS Offers Parents Ways to Reduce DSS Child Support Debt Through the Parent Success Program

Overwhelming debt can make it harder for parents to better support their child. To help, the Office of Child Support Services (OCSS) offers the Parent Success Program, one of several debt reduction programs available to noncustodial parents who owe child support debt to the Department of Social Services (DSS).

The OCSS Parent Success Program offers parents two ways to reduce their child support debt owed to the Department of Social Services (DSS) by up to $7500. Parents can participate in either a DSS employment program or a drug treatment program. By participating in one of these Parent Success Program options, parents can take a significant step towards financial relief.

Parent Success Employment Program

A parent, whose child is or was in receipt of Cash Assistance, is eligible to have their DSS child support debut reduced by up to $7500 when they:

are enrolled in a DSS employment program (such as Parent Support Program, Jobs-Plus, or an OCSS job training partner program);

obtains a new job,

reports it to their employment program; and

makes consistent child support payments through their employer for at least 90 days.

Parents don’t need to apply for the reduction; the Office of Child Support Services will reduce their debt based on data provided by the employment program and child support program records. To learn more about the OCSS Parent Success Program’s Employment option, refer to the Employment Frequently Asked Questions

Parent Success Drug Treatment Program

Another pathway to lower DSS child support debt is through the OCSS Parents Success Program’s Drug Treatment option. To qualify, parents must complete a drug treatment program certified by the New York State Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse Services (OASAS) and approved by NYC Human Resources Administration. Upon completion, parents must submit their certificate or letter from the program provider to OCSS. Once OCSS receives the documentation and verifies that the parent qualifies, OCSS will notify the parent that the debt owed to DSS has been reduced. To learn more, visit the Drug Treatment Frequent Asked Questions.

Children thrive when both parents are actively involved in their lives. The OCSS Parent Success Program gives parents two options to reduce the child support debt they owe to DSS. The result? Parents are better equipped to enhance their own lives and support their children. Please share this link with your clients so they can learn more about the Parent Success Program and other debt reduction programs offered by OCSS.

Changes to the Availability of Low-Income Child Care Vouchers - Effective May 5, 2025

The Administration for Children’s Services (ACS) has announced that due to insufficient funding, the City is currently unable to offer child care vouchers to families that are not on cash assistance. Additionally, ACS will no longer be able to process new child care vouchers for families who applied on or after May 5, 2025. While families may submit an application for an ACS child care voucher, please be aware that if the family meets income and programmatic eligibility criteria, their child(ren) will be placed on a voucher waitlist.

If the family currently has a child care voucher, child care assistance will continue uninterrupted. As a reminder, please ensure that families submit recertification materials by the deadline provided in their annual recertification packet. If they do not successfully recertify by the end of their eligibility period, they will lose their child care assistance benefits.

If a family think they may be eligible for cash assistance, they can find information about applying at HRA or visit ACCESS HRA to apply online.

Childcare for Cash Assistance Recipients

Recipients of Cash Assistance who are participating in an approved education or training program outside of the home, or are employed, may be eligible for childcare assistance. These needs are assessed at application and recertification. Clients who become employed or engaged outside of the home in between recertifications should contact HRA through ACCESS HRA and provide documentation as soon as possible so that we may help to address these needs.

To find out more about Childcare for Cash Assistance Recipients, please visit the HRA Cash Assistance webpage.

New York State Child Support Resources

New York State Child Support Program Launches Redesigned Website Featuring Online Enrollment

The New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) recently announced the launch of a new online enrollment form for child support services as part of the Child Support Program's recently redesigned website, childsupport.ny.gov. The new site has a more intuitive and easier to navigate design, allowing individuals to enroll for child support services online and providing existing users access to more information about their case.

New Yorkers can now enroll online for child support services using their phone, tablet, or computer. Additionally, the website enables those paying or receiving child support to easily review the dates and amounts of payments, access account statements, and message their local child support office.

New York State's Child Support Program provides parents with assistance in obtaining financial support and medical insurance coverage for their children by locating parents, establishing paternity, establishing and modifying support orders, and collecting and distributing child support payments. The program serves nearly 536,000 children, collecting more than $1.67 billion annually on their behalf.

The Child Support Program is overseen by the Division of Child Support Services within OTDA and is administered by local departments of social services in New York State and New York City.

Find more information on New York's Child Support Program at childsupport.ny.gov.

New York State Child Support Online Enrollment for Non-Public Assistance Custodial Parents

The State OTDA recently launched an online child support enrollment form for non-public assistance custodial parents.

It is called the Online Enrollment Wizard; the form makes it much easier for custodial parents to provide the information needed to open a child support case. The entire process is easily handled by mobile phone but can also be completed using a desktop, laptop, or tablet.

The process starts at enroll.childsupport.ny.gov. To log in to the form, custodial parents either need to use an existing NY.gov ID or create one. From there, they can fill in the requested information and then upload supporting documents such as birth certificates or court orders. For more information on the child support program, you can access Wizard through the State’s main website: childsupport.ny.gov/enroll

While the form is short enough to complete in one sitting, users can save their work along the way and return to it as needed—provided they do so within 60 days of starting the enrollment process. A tutorial video of the Online Enrollment Wizard is available here this video.

Early Care & Education Programs for New York City Families

NYC Public School Child Care & Early Education Guide

The childcare guide, which includes information about seeking childcare for parents, is available in multiple languages and includes the following information:

Understanding types of childcare programs offered

Choosing a program based on child eligibility

Confirming if there is an open seat for the child

Steps to enrolling the child in a program

The guide can be accessed here.

New York City offers many free or low-cost child care and educational programs for families that qualify. These programs provide care and education for children from birth to thirteen years old (or up to 19 years old for children with disabilities), all year round. Eligibility is based on the applicant’s family's income and reason for care. Open enrollment is available for applicants who meet the eligibility criteria and pending availability.

The Early Care & Education Programs for New York City Families Flyer has more information on all early care and education programs available for New York City families. Click here to download translations of the flyer.

MyCity & Child Care Subsidy Portal

The NYC Office of Technology and Innovation launched MyCity, a New Yorker's streamlined online connection to City services and benefits.

MyCity is a one-stop shop for New York City services and benefits. Through this multilingual website, New Yorkers can check eligibility qualifications, complete applications, track service status, and securely store personal information and documentation for future use.

MyCity Child Care

The first service launched through MyCity was the subsidized child care application. It is now simplified to make it easier for families to apply for free or reduced cost child care and manage their benefits.

Through a single application, MyCity helps New Yorkers apply for several child care subsidy programs offered and administered by the New York City Administration for Children's Services, Department of Education, Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services, and New York State. Agency staff receive applications electronically immediately after they are submitted and can provide status updates to applicants through MyCity.

The new portal transforms the way families apply for care by screening for eligibility upfront, securely uploading and storing their documentation, tracking the status of their application, and receiving notifications if more information is needed. The portal provides parents with a seamless, user-friendly online application process that eliminates the need to print and mail forms from multiple websites to apply for subsidized child care.

Learn more about MyCity and provide feedback on current and future offerings at mycity.nyc.gov.

Free Head Start and Early Head Start Programs for SNAP Households

Free Head Start and Early Head Start Programs for SNAP Households

Head Start and Early Head Start programs are designed to provide free, comprehensive services for children age birth through five years and their families. Core services focus on early learning, health, nutrition, and family well-being. Early Head Start programs are for infants, toddlers, and pregnant women, and provide up to 10 hours of care. Head Start preschool programs primarily serve three and four-year-old children, which include up to 6 to 8 hours of care. All services are free for those eligible and all meals are included.

Congress established eligibility criteria in the Head Start Act to include families with incomes at or below the federal poverty level and families eligible for public assistance. Prior to this change in Head Start policy, SNAP participation and eligibility was excluded from the term "public assistance", requiring SNAP households to verify their income. Previous policy only considered Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and Supplemental Security Income (SSI) as "public assistance" in determining categorical eligibility for Head Start programs.

Now SNAP households are allowed to demonstrate their Head Start eligibility through providing verification of their SNAP receipt or eligibility and are no longer required to verify their income twice for programs with similar requirements. To be deemed categorically eligible for Head Start services, SNAP households must provide acceptable verification such as a copy of a SNAP notice of approval, other documentation of eligibility or benefits from a local district office, or proof of an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card with a SNAP case number.

To find Head Start programs in your county, visit the Head Start | ECLKC Center Locator.

Learn more about Head Start and Early Head Start programs. For more information about SNAP eligibility for Head Start programs, visit the Head Start | ECLKC website and ACCESS HRA.

Eviction Protections & Housing Resources

New Online Resource Guide from the Office of New Americans

The Office of New Americans has created a new online resource guide intended to help all residents of New York, including immigrants. Know Your Resources, Know Your Rights includes information related to:

Federal Action Reporting

Family Preparedness

The New Americans Hotline for immigration legal help and other resources

The NYS Office of New Americans for free assistance to all immigrants of New York State

Food and Nutrition Resources related to SNAP benefits and a free food pantries finder tool

Health and Family Services Resources to connect to health care centers, health insurance, addiction services, and more

Employment and other Vital Services Resources, such as worker rights and reporting discrimination

Multilingual flyers to share information about this online guide

Release of New Resource: Tenant Bill of Rights

The NYC Tenant Protection Cabinet (TPC) and Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD) have announced the release of the Tenant Bill of Rights. This new resource outlines the rights of New York City tenants in relation to the following:

Fair and Equal Access to Housing

Housing Quality

Leases and Security Deposits

Evictions and Legal Lockouts

Landlord Harassment and Tenant Organizing

Rent-Stabilized Apartments

Apartments Covered by Good Cause Eviction

Please note that the Tenant Bill of Rights is not a substitute for advice from a lawyer or legal representation. For additional resources, such as connecting to free legal services, call 311 and ask for the Tenant Helpline or HPD at 212-863-6300. To find a printable version of the flyer in multiple languages, visit the Tenant Bill of Rights webpage. The corresponding social media toolkit can be found here. To register for a housing information class, click here.

NYC Landlords & Managing Agents’ Guide to Supporting Residents with Potential Mental Health Conditions

The Mayor’s Office of Community Mental Health offers a comprehensive guide to mental health services for landlords and managing agents, which can be found here. If a landlord or managing agent feels comfortable addressing a mental health challenge with a resident, they can encourage the tenant to seek help by referring them to NYC 988 to identify mental health provider organizations and services by geographic location. The landlord can also call NYC 988 to speak with a counselor if a tenant does not seem to be getting the help they need, or symptoms worsen. Depending on the situation, NYC 988 may recommend sending a Mobile Crisis Team to visit the resident or facilitate a referral to a Short-term Mental Health Crisis Residence. Click here for a full list of mental health and substance use resources guides, palm cards, and flyers.

Mayor’s Office Tenant & Property Owner Resources

Mayor's Office to Protect Tenants – Resource Guides

The Mayor's Office to Protect Tenants created resource guides for tenants and residential property owners to help those struggling as a result of financial hardship caused by the pandemic.

Download a Resource Guide for Residential Owners, The guide summarizes programs through which owners can access rental arrears, foreclosure protections, loans, and individualized assistance.

The Tenant Flyer provides useful information for tenants who may be struggling to pay rent or facing eviction. Download the flyer from the MOPT website.

Mayor's Public Engagement Unit's Tenant Helpline

The Public Engagement Unit's Tenant Helpline serves as a one-stop shop to inform New York City tenants about their rights and connect them to housing-related resources, including free legal services. Because tenants who call the helpline are frequently experiencing a range of connected hardships, the Helpline also offers assistance with additional City programs like SNAP, Cash Assistance, Homebase, and One-Shot Deals, etc and helps with applying for State programs like rent relief and unemployment insurance. If you are at risk of eviction or experience a housing-related issue, please call 311 and ask for the Tenant Helpline.

The Tenant Resource Portal is a tool which provides personalized information to help individuals learn about their rights and maintain stable housing. This eviction prevention tool was designed by the Mayor's Office to Protect Tenants (MOPT) and the Mayor's Public Engagement Unit's (PEU) Tenant Support Unit (TSU) to help renters navigate public and private resources that can stabilize their housing situation. A tenant seeking help will be taken through a series of questions and directed to the most useful resources based on their responses. MOPT and PEU have included resources from multiple city agencies, Legal Service Providers, and Community Based Organizations. Click here to visit the Tenant Resource Portal.

Tenant and Property Owner Resources

The Mayor's Office to Protect Tenants (MOPT) and the Mayor's Public Engagement Unit's (PEU) Tenant Support Unit (TSU) have created an online tool to help renters in New York City navigate public and private resources that can stabilize their housing situation. A tenant seeking help will be taken through a series of questions and directed to the most useful resources based on their responses, including information about free legal services for tenants through HRA's Office of Civil Justice (OCJ). MOPT and PEU have included resources from multiple City agencies, Legal Services Providers, and Community-Based Organizations.

Legal Services Providers or Community-Based Organizations are encouraged to recommend additional resources using the online feedback form.

This page is updated regularly as new information is made available. Please visit the Tenant Protection site.

Pet Owner Eviction Project

Animal Haven's Pet Owner Eviction Project, in partnership with the Mayor's Office of Animal Welfare and NYC Emergency Management's Animal Planning Task Force, connects vulnerable tenants at risk of losing their pets while facing a potential eviction with free and low-cost resources. For more information and assistance, individuals can call the Animal Care Centers of NYC at 212-788-4000 and visit the Mayor's Office of Animal Welfare website.

Brooklyn Civil Housing Court Pilot Update

Since February 21, 2023, DSS/HRA has participated in a pilot program in the Brooklyn Civil Housing Court to assist tenants on their first scheduled calendar date to apply for emergency rental assistance.

When an individual without legal counsel appears at the Brooklyn Civil Housing Court for their first court date in response to an eviction filing by their landlord, they will be directed to the Human Resources Administration (HRA) at the court to begin an application for emergency rental assistance. This process takes place before their appearance before the judge, following check-in with the court officer and the granting of an automatic 45-day stay.

We have now introduced a new Brooklyn Civil Housing Court pilot specifically for landlords with City Fighting Homelessness and Eviction Prevention Supplement (CityFHEPS) or Family Homelessness and Eviction Prevention Supplement (FHEPS) tenants residing in Brooklyn to help prevent CityFHEPS and FHEPS landlords from taking their tenants living in Brooklyn to housing court for nonpayment of rent.

Intervention Process for CityFHEPS and FHEPS Tenants Residing in Brooklyn

As of November 2024, as an upfront intervention to the Brooklyn Housing Court pilot, DSS/HRA will send out the “Need Help with Rent Owed by an HRA Subsidy Tenant?” (HRA-225) notice to landlords who have CityFHEPS or FHEPS tenants residing in Brooklyn.

The objective of the intervention process is to prevent CityFHEPS and FHEPS landlords from taking their tenants to Brooklyn Civil Housing Court for nonpayment of rent.

The HRA-225 notice informs landlords of the following:

If they are owed rent from a CityFHEPS or FHEPS tenant who receives rental assistance from HRA, they should contact HRA before filing an eviction proceeding with the court.

HRA may be able to address the situation, and where appropriate, issue back rent payments to bring the client up to date and limit the possibility of future arrears.

If they want to participate in this process, to please scan the QR code on the letter and fill out the online application.

If they have questions about the notice or are unable to access the application, to please call DSS OneNumber.

CityFHEPS & FHEPS

CityFHEPS is a rental assistance supplement administered by HRA/DSS to help individuals and families find and keep housing. CityFHEPS is available to eligible individual adults, adult families, and families with children, who reside in DHS and HRA shelters, as well as households in the community at risk of homelessness.

For more CityFHEPS resources and information click here.

The State FHEPS program is a rent supplement for families with children who receive Cash Assistance and have been evicted or are facing eviction, who lost their housing due to a domestic violence situation, or who have lost their housing because of health or safety issues. Formerly known as the Family Eviction Prevention Supplement (FEPS), the program has been expanded to include survivors of domestic violence and their children. The administration of this State program has transitioned from the State to the City. Potentially eligible families must have an active Cash Assistance case and will be screened for this benefit once an Emergency Grant and/or ongoing Cash Assistance application has been received. There is no dedicated State FHEPS application. Clients can only be considered for the program by applying for Cash/Emergency Assistance. Cash/Emergency Assistance applications are available on ACCESS HRA or at open HRA Benefits Access Centers.

State FHEPS information and documentation for providers, landlords and brokers can be accessed in multiple languages on our FHEPS page.

Housing Education Series for Older Adults

In 2022, Manhattan Community Board 7's Senior Task Force sponsored a virtual housing education series for older adults on obtaining housing, maintaining housing, and thriving in housing. Please click on the links below to view each webinar.

Session I - Obtaining Housing: Learn how to navigate the housing search process, including waitlists, housing lotteries, income verifications, and types of affordable housing.

Session II - Maintaining Housing: Resources to help tenants maintain housing, including rental assistance, benefits and entitlements, and basic human rights.

Session III - Thriving in Housing: Community resources and organizations working in CB7 that can help tenants thrive in their housing. Some of these resources might be available to you as well.

Rental Assistance Finder

The federal government continues to enact an all-of-government effort to ensure renters and landlords can take advantage of the relief available to them on a local level.

As part of that effort, the federal Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) has developed a new tool, the Rental Assistance Finder that allows renters and landlords to find rental assistance programs in their area.

Enterprise Data Warehouse Report for Housing Advocates

As of July 10, 2020, we have a streamlined process for obtaining client and case information to assist in Housing Court cases. The Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) will produce a consolidated report providing all relevant client and case information to assist advocates in Housing Court cases. This report replaces the numerous screens and printouts from the State Welfare Management System (WMS) that the HRA Landlord Ombudsman Service Unit (LOSU) was collecting and providing upon request. Housing Advocates can submit requests to LOSU using the newly created Housing Court Report Request Form (HPA-106).

Right-to-Counsel/Universal Access Legal Services Progress Report

New York City's Right to Counsel law is implemented citywide, regardless of zip code. All tenants appearing in eviction proceedings in New York City Housing Court and in NYCHA termination proceedings have access to free legal services provided by nonprofit legal services organizations supported by HRA's Office of Civil Justice (OCJ). For more information, New Yorkers can visit OCJ's website at www.nyc.gov/rtc or refer to any of the tenant resources below:

Call Housing Court Answers at 718-557-1379 or 212-962-4795 from Monday - Friday, between 9am and 5pm.

Call 311 and ask for the Tenant Helpline.

Email OCJ at civiljustice@hra.nyc.gov. Please provide a name, telephone number, and a Housing Court case index number for your eviction case (if you have one) in your email.

Contact a nonprofit law office near you. Download a list of OCJ's nonprofit law office partners that provide free legal help for tenants.

NYC Rent Freeze Program

The NYC Rent Freeze Program, which includes the Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemption (SCRIE) Program and the Disability Rent Increase Exemption (DRIE) Program, helps those eligible stay in affordable housing by freezing their rent.

Visit the NYC Rent Freeze Program website for SCRIE and DRIE eligibility requirements.

Click here to learn more about Rent Freeze and apply.

Refer to the Rent Freeze Program website for assistance and to answer relevant questions.

Homeless Services

Homeless Drop-In Centers

Drop-In Centers (DICs) are low-barrier programs specifically targeted toward unsheltered individuals who may be resistant to accepting other services, including traditional shelters. DICs are equipped with on-site services and staff who work closely with unsheltered New Yorkers to build trust, stabilize lives, and encourage further transition off the streets and into transitional and permanent housing. These facilities can often be the first step towards helping unsheltered New Yorkers back on the path to stability.

Drop-In Centers provide baseline services with the goal of meeting immediate needs for unsheltered New Yorkers, such as showers and meals. DICs also have on-site case management services and staff, providing an immediate option for individuals who want to transition off the streets.

New Yorkers who are experiencing unsheltered homelessness and residing on the streets and/or subways can visit Drop-In Centers to receive specialized services including:

Hot meals

Clothing, showers and laundry facilities

Counseling, case management services, and connections to medical care and mental health care as appropriate

Help finding a job or applying for benefits

There are DICs in each borough and all centers are open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, including holidays. For a listing of the DICs, click here.

Storage Allowance/Grant for Cash Assistance Recipients

An allowance for storage of furniture and personal belongings is available under client circumstances involving temporary shelter, eviction, or relocation as long as eligibility for Cash Assistance or Emergency Assistance is met. Applicants and clients can apply for storage assistance through ACCESS HRA. Applicants for a storage allowance are no longer required to provide three (3) estimates before payments can be made, but the request must meet certain storage size and cost requirements. The information below outlines these allowable costs and sizes:

Household Size

Storage Space Size

Max Rate

1+

5x5x4 (locker) – 100 Cubic Ft

$60.00

1+

5x5x8 – 200 Cubic Ft

$150.00

1+

5x10x8 – 400 Cubic Ft

$216.00

2+, 3+

5x15x8 – 600 Cubic Ft

$279.00

4+, 5+

10x10x8 – 800 Cubic Ft

$368.00

6+

10x15x8 – 1200 Cubic Ft

$547.00

If a client has a lot of belongings they want to keep:

The outreach teams will assist clients through the HRA storage process - and DHS works closely w HRA to expedite and/or address any issues

The outreach teams try to work through all barriers to coming inside with a client, so if belongings are an issue, the teams will engage the client and work with them to consolidate or reorganize as necessary, as well as continue to work on identifying storage. Additional information can also be found in the FIA-127d Special Grant Document Guide.

Reasonable Accommodation Request Process for DHS Clients

DHS applicants and clients may request a reasonable accommodation at any point in time and do not need to use specific language (e.g., reasonable accommodation) in order to ask for help that they need because of a disability or medically-related condition. Applicants and clients may ask for help because of a disability from staff at any intake, assessment, or shelter location. They may complete the Reasonable Accommodation Request Form (DHS-13) and if they need assistance with completing the request form, staff can help. Please note that applicants and clients do not have to fill out the request form to request an accommodation; staff can fill out the request form on behalf of the client. Once a request is made, the request will be reviewed. If documentation is needed for a condition/need that is not obvious or apparent, supporting documentation will be needed from the client so that the request can be reviewed. Applicants and clients can use this process for any reasonable accommodation requests, including single room requests. The Reasonable Accommodation Request Flyer can be found here in multiple languages.

DSS Office of Ombudsman Contact Information

The DSS Office of the Ombudsman is an independent and impartial unit whose mission is to support individuals and families experiencing homelessness in New York City, assist them on their path to fairer access to essential resources, improve their quality of life while in shelter, and advocate for a meaningful role in the decision-making processes that affect their lives. DSS Office of the Ombudsman is on the 8th Floor of 109 East 16th Street, New York, NY 10003, where DSS provides client-facing services. Clients can reach the DSS Office of the Ombudsman as follows:

Email to Ombudsman@dss.nyc.gov.

Call the DSS OneNumber at 718-557-1399 or dial 311 to report shelter complaints or request repairs.

Call the Office of the Ombudsman at 800-994-6494, Monday through Friday from 9:00 am to 5:00 pm, to speak with a staff member.

Meet with an Ombudsman staff member, at 109 E 16th Street, 8th Floor, New York, NY 10003, Monday through Friday between the hours of 9 a.m. and 4 p.m.

While constituents always have the option of contacting DSS' Office of the Ombudsman directly, they may also submit a Constituent Grievance Form in writing to their shelter director or shelter case worker, as a way of presenting grievances concerning their receipt of DHS-funded services. The Office of the Ombudsman Brochure and the Constituent Grievance Form are available in numerous languages online.

Health Insurance

NYC Care Health Care Access Program

NYC Care is a health care access program that guarantees low-cost and no-cost services to New Yorkers who do not qualify for or cannot afford health insurance. All NYC Care services are provided through NYC Health + Hospitals.

NYC Care is the nation's largest and most comprehensive initiative to guarantee health care for New Yorkers, regardless of immigration status or ability to pay.

Eligibility

Must live in the five boroughs of New York City

Must not qualify for any health insurance plan available in New York State

Not be able to afford health insurance based on government guidelines

To enroll: 646-NYC-CARE

More details are available in multiple languages.

New Health Insurance Option for Undocumented Immigrants Aged 65 and Over

As of January 1, 2024, there is a new option for health insurance available for undocumented immigrants who are age 65 and older. The new insurance is through Medicaid Managed Care plans, with a carved-out Fee-for-Service pharmacy benefit and offers a more comprehensive benefit package for this population. Previously, undocumented immigrants aged 65 and older qualified for Emergency Medicaid. The new insurance adds preventive and primary care benefits, including routine doctor visits, recommended screenings, lab tests, wellness services, prescription drugs and supplies, and more.

Learn more on the NY State of Health website

Free in NYC: YouTube Video for NYC Seniors and People Living with a Disability

HRA's YouTube channel now features the first Free in NYC video for New York City residents who are age 65 and older or have disabilities. This new video provides important information about free enrollment assistance that helps New Yorkers apply for Medicaid and the Medicare Savings Program. The assistance is provided by the New York City Facilitated Enrollment Program for the Aged, Disabled and Blind program and is funded by the New York State Department of Health.

The video, Free help to Enroll in Medicaid for Seniors and People with Disabilities, is the first in a series of explainer videos created by HRA's Office of Citywide Health Insurance Access to help NYC seniors and people with disabilities learn more about Medicaid and the Medicare Savings Program, and how to access these programs.

You can watch the video on YouTube. Please share the video with clients and partners to help us increase awareness of this free program.

Health Resources

Social Care Network for Medicaid Members: Including Medically Tailored Meals and Groceries

New York State created the Social Care Network (SCN) program to connect Medicaid members with help for health-related social needs. These needs—like safe housing, healthy food, and reliable transportation—can affect health just as much as medical care. The program’s goal is to make it easier for Medicaid members to get the support they need to live healthier, more stable lives.

All Medicaid members will be screened and assessed for eligibility. If a client is found eligible for Level 1 services, they will be referred to currently existing resources. If they are found eligible for Enhanced (Level 2) services, they will be referred to community-based organizations contracted by the SCNs. Services are temporary and range from short-term (1-2 weeks) to long-term care (up to 6 months). Services are free for eligible members and may include:

Nutrition

Nutrition counseling and education

Medically tailored meals or food prescriptions

Pantry restocking

Cooking supplies

Housing

Help with housing applications and tenancy counseling

Support with accessing rental assistance, temporary housing, or utilities

Home safety or accessibility modifications

Asthma and allergy remediation

Medical respite care

Transportation

Public or private rides to get to social care services (Note: does not cover trips to medical appointments)

For more information, including where to get screened, click here.

Essential Plan Cooling Program

Governor Hochul announced a new cooling program that provides free air conditioners to eligible New Yorkers who are enrolled in the State’s Essential Plan and live with persistent asthma. This initiative helps people with persistent asthma manage their increased risk of health issues linked to rising temperatures. It aims to prevent asthma-related emergency visits and hospital stays, which will lower health care costs.

To qualify, you must submit an application for the Essential Plan Cooling Program and meet the following eligibility requirements:

Be enrolled in NY State of Health’s Essential Plan

Have persistent asthma

Meaning you experience asthma symptoms such as shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing attacks, chest tightness, or chest pain much of the time or need a daily medication for asthma to control your symptoms

Have not received a cooling unit in the past five years through the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) Cooling Assistance Component.

Request installation at the permanent residential address on file with NY State of Health

Agree to program terms and conditions

Applications should only take 5-10 minutes to complete and are processed on a first come, first served basis until August 31 while funding lasts. Applicants get an update on if their application was approved within two to three weeks

To learn more about the program, click here.

Suicide and Crisis Emergency Hotline

Today, 988 is the new emergency number for the Suicide and Mental Health Crisis hotline (like 911 for mental health). Click here to learn more about the Suicide and Mental Health Crisis hotline.

Reproductive Rights Resources

Abortion is legal and protected in New York. Abortion services are still available to all patients seeking care. Patients seeking a medication abortion may be able to receive their medicine by mail without visiting their doctor's office. Learn more, access resources, and find help getting services.

In New York, information and resources are also available on the New York State website.

HHS has launched a new website, ReproductiveRights.gov, to provide accurate, up-to-date information about access to and coverage of reproductive health care and resources.

Additionally, New York Attorney General Letitia James, 24 national law firms, and eight reproductive rights organizations announced the launch of a legal hotline that will provide legal guidance and resources to patients, healthcare providers, and supporters seeking information about their legal rights to access and provide abortions. The legal hotline, which is part of Attorney General James' new Pro Bono Task Force on Reproductive Health, will be available to anyone who is seeking legal information and legal advice about abortions in New York, patients seeking to travel to New York to obtain an abortion, healthcare providers, and people and organizations providing material support. The hotline is free and will be available in the 12 most common languages spoken in New York.

Hotline Number: 212-899-5567

Learn more about the hotline and other NY resources.

Courses for Providers: The Academy for Community Behavioral Health

The Academy for Community Behavioral Health – a partnership between the Mayor's Office for Economic Opportunity, the Mayor's Office of Community Mental Health, and the CUNY School of Professional Studies – provides training, coaching, and technical assistance to community-based organizations and City and State agencies to build capacity and integrate proactive and culturally responsive behavioral health support into social services.

Free virtual courses are open to non-profit social service providers, including staff at NYC community-based organizations and City and State agencies who fund or deliver services in NYC.

Click here to learn more or view and sign-up for upcoming courses. Contact academy4cbh@sps.cuny.edu with any questions.

AfterCare Program for Long COVID

The NYC Test & Treat Corps AfterCare program hotline is for New Yorkers seeking information and resources to recover from Long COVID. New Yorkers who are suffering from or suspect they may have Long COVID can now call AfterCare Navigators directly. AfterCare Navigators are health outreach specialists with experience supporting people during their COVID infection and will assess patients for their specific health and social needs and connect them to Long COVID resources. AfterCare Navigators connect patients to holistic resources – including physical and mental health referrals, community support, and financial assistance – to address the various physical symptoms, as well as the social and economic impacts, that New Yorkers with Long COVID may experience.

New Yorkers can call 212-COVID19 (212-268-4319), select their preferred language, and press 4 to speak directly to an AfterCare navigator. Learn more on the AfterCare website and through AfterCare's Long COVID recovery guide.

Financial Resources & Updates

Congestion Relief Zone Toll and People with Disabilities

Starting January 5, 2025, vehicles entering the Congestion Relief Zone – local streets and avenues south of and including 60 St – will be charged a toll. The Congestion Relief Zone will reduce gridlock in one of the most congested districts in the United States, while generating revenue for mass transit improvements.

Toll Information

Rates vary by vehicle type, time of day, and whether crossing credits apply.

For most vehicles with E-ZPass, the toll will be $9 during the peak period or $2.25 overnight (once daily).

Update your E-ZPass account with your current license plate. (For more info, click here).

For full details on the Congestion Relief Zone Toll, visit congestionreliefzone.mta.info.

Discount & Exemption Plans

You, your clients, or your organization may be eligible for a discount or exemption plan. Click the links below for more info on each program.

Individual Disability Exemption Plan (IDEP):

For individuals with disabilities that prevent them from using use mass transit. Can be assigned to a personal or caregiver’s vehicle.

Organizational Disability Exemption Plan (ODEP):

For organizations with vehicles transporting people with disabilities, e.g., Access-A-Ride or schools.

Low-Income Discount Plan (LIDP):

For people with incomes of $50,000 or less, or those in SNAP, WIC, or TANF.

50% toll discount during peak periods after 10 trips in a calendar month.

Resident Tax Credit:

Zone residents with NY State income under $60,000 may claim a tax credit.

For full details about eligibility, documentation requirements, and how to apply, visit mta.info/discounts.

You or your clients may also be eligible for the MTA Reduced Fare Program or NYC Fair Fares for help paying fares. Click here to learn more.

NYC Department of Consumer and Worker Protection (DCWP) Resources

The NYC Department of Consumer and Worker Protection (DCWP)—formerly the Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA)—protects and enhances the daily economic lives of New Yorkers to create thriving communities.

Through its community outreach and the work of its offices of Financial Empowerment and Labor Policy & Standards, DCWP empowers consumers and working families by providing the tools and resources they need to be educated consumers and to achieve financial health and work-life balance.

DCWP Offering NYC Free Tax Prep Program for Self-Employed New Yorkers

With over 130 locations across the city, services are available in multiple languages to ensure access for all communities.

Support for Self-Employed New Yorkers

NYC Free Tax Prep offers specialized services tailored to freelancers, gig workers, and other self-employed individuals. Resources are available year-round.

Eligibility: Must have business expenses of $250,000 or less.

Services include:

Free tax preparation for annual and quarterly estimated tax filing services for self-employed filers

Workshops and events (see the full calendar) NYC Free Tax Prep - Self-Employed Tax Prep Event Calendar

Consultations: Clients can locate a site with specially trained tax preparers by selecting “Self-Employed/Schedule C Assistance” on the NYC Free Tax Prep Map site finder

Toolkits and Resources: recordkeeping templates, and other business resources on the DCWP website nyc.gov/taxprep.

Volunteer with NYC Free Tax Prep

Make a difference in your community! Learn about NYC Free Tax Prep volunteer opportunities by signing up through our online volunteer registration form.

Contact:

Call 311 and ask for “Tax Preparation”

Visit: nyc.gov/taxprep

Email: freetaxprep@dcwp.nyc.gov

Financial Literacy for Youth

The Financial Literacy for Youth initiative will make sure that every public school student can learn how to save and spend money by 2030.

Financial Counseling

NYC Financial Empowerment Center counselors are available to support New Yorkers over the phone with free financial counseling. It is free and confidential. Book an appointment online.

File Your Taxes

NYC Free Tax Prep preparers provide assistance all year round. If you missed the deadline, you can still use NYC Free Tax Prep to file your return or have questions answered. If you think you will owe taxes, it is a good idea to make an estimated payment.

If you earned $93,000 or less in 2024, file for FREE with an IRS-certified VITA/TCE volunteer preparer. See a checklist of what you need to file your 2024 tax return.

Get Tax Credit Information

Tax credits can help reduce the amount of income tax you owe. Some tax credits are refundable tax credits, which can increase your tax refund amount if you owe less than the credit amount.

Open a Savings Account

The NYC SafeStart Account is a savings account for all New Yorkers. Features:

NO overdraft fees

NO monthly fees, provided minimum balances are met

LOW minimum balance requirements ($25 or less)

ATM card (No debit card)

Assistance with Supplemental Security Income (SSI)

The Social Security Administration offers a tool to provide assistance with applications for Social Security Income (SSI). The process takes 5 – 10 minutes and asks for basic information about the person who wants to apply for SSI. A Social Security representative will schedule an appointment and send the appointment information by mail (or email, if provided). In some cases, a Social Security representative may call to schedule the appointment.

Using this tool documents intent to file an application and establishes a protective filing date. The protective filing date determines when payments can begin if an application is approved.

Certain third parties, such as parents of minor children, family members, representatives, or members of advocacy groups, can also use the tool to express interest about applying for SSI on behalf of someone they are helping.

Email the Public Affairs Specialist or regional contacts at ny.rpa@ssa.gov with any questions.

The tool can be found at: Get Started to Apply for SSI | SSA

New York State ABLE

The NYS Achieving a Better Life Experience (NY ABLE) program allows eligible New Yorkers with disabilities to save for qualified short-term and long-term disability-related expenses on a tax-free basis while also keeping Medicaid, SSI and other government benefits. Disability-related expenses are costly and can make it hard to save for long-term financial security; NY ABLE can help. Click here to learn more about New York State ABLE.

New Online Portal for DFTA Volunteers

The Department for the Aging (DFTA) launched a =volunteer portal to make it easier for individuals and public/private partners to sign up for opportunities to support older adults. With the portal's new streamlined process, New Yorkers can see what opportunities are available and register online.
Learn more about these opportunities here.

Lifeline Telephone Discount

Lifeline is a federal program that offers a monthly discount on telephone and internet service for qualified low-income customers. Consumers qualify for Lifeline by participating in certain federal or state assistance programs or by having income at or below 135% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines. The Lifeline discount can be applied to either home telephone service (landline or cable) or wireless service and is available for only one line per household. Visit LifelineSupport.org to learn more about Lifeline.

Service providers and consumer advocates can visit usac.org/lifeline for additional information about the program.

Additional NYC Resources & Benefits

Resources from 2nd Annual Fatherhood Policy Symposium

The NYC Children’s Cabinet hosted their second annual symposium on April 7, 2026. Participants shared their energy, expertise, and commitment, which reflects exactly why this work matters.

We would like to provide a few resources to keep the momentum going:

Citywide Fatherhood Plan: Read the plan that is driving this work across city agencies

Full Event Recording: Watch or share the full symposium recording

LinkedIn Recap:See highlights from the day and tag your colleagues

Post-Event Survey: Your feedback directly shapes our next symposium. The survey takes just a few minutes!

Please share these resources widely with your networks. The more voices we bring into this work, the stronger it becomes.

Employment Opportunities with the City of NY

Join the NYC Department of Social Services! Find out how rewarding it is to serve fellow New Yorkers with care and compassion.

Search for open positions and learn more about NYC government employment.

Some City jobs require a civil service title. The NYC Department of Citywide Administrative Services (DCAS) is responsible for administering civil service exams. Find out about upcoming civil service exams citywide by subscribing to the DCAS mailing list and select "City Jobs and Civil Service Announcements" to receive announcements for upcoming exams.
Click here to learn more about Civil Service Exams

To view jobs available with the City at any time, visit the DCAS employment page, or search for jobs by agency or area of interest, or search for jobs by ID number or agency. Download a flyer with more information about applying for HRA open positions.

CBO Referrals from 311 & HRA

In an effort to connect clients with community partners that can provide assistance with access to benefits and other support services, we ask any organizations interested in accepting referrals from 311 and/or being listed on our Find a Partner Organization page to contact us. If your organization is currently providing in-person or phone assistance to clients applying for HRA benefits, (including ACCESS HRA and/or Fair Fares guidance), and interested in receiving referrals from 311 or being featured on our external site, please contact dssoutreach@dss.nyc.gov to submit your request or learn more.

STRIVE Workforce Development

STRIVE is a national workforce development leader that has successfully provided services to populations facing significant employment barriers since 1984. STRIVE is an HRA-approved training provider offering trainings in Green Construction, Healthcare and Office Operations across three programs, Career Path, Future Leaders and Fresh Start. They currently offer 1-hour virtual and in-person information sessions for candidates who may qualify or are interested in learning more about their programs. Click here to complete the interest form. Visit the STRIVE website for more information.

Free Municipal Broadband for NYCHA Residents

The Big Apple Connect Program ensures that NYCHA residents have access to free, fast, reliable, and safe internet. NYCHA residents without existing home internet can sign up for Big Apple Connect with either Optimum or Spectrum (service provider depends on where they live). Existing Optimum and Spectrum customers can have their bills reduced to as low as $0, as monthly internet and basic cable TV charges are eliminated. NYCHA residents in eligible developments are eligible to receive:

FREE internet connections with download speeds of up to 300 Mbps

FREE wireless router

FREE modem

FREE basic cable TV

FREE cable box and remote control

Learn more about Big Apple Connect and Eligible NYCHA Developments here.

Resources for People with Disabilities

Digital Accessibility Resources

The Mayor's Office for People with Disabilities developed guidance to assist organizations in improving communication with New Yorkers who identify as having a disability. The Digital Accessibility Resources provide assistance to organizations to ensure communication is clear to individuals with disabilities.

To learn more, click here

Health and Human Services Disability Information and Access Line (DIAL)

During the pandemic, the U.S. Health and Human Services (HHS) launched a first-of-its-kind national hotline to connect people with disabilities to information and services to improve access to COVID-19 vaccines. The Disability Information and Access Line (DIAL) is available to help people with disabilities find vaccination locations in their communities, assist callers with making vaccination appointments, and connect callers to local services – such as accessible transportation – to overcome barriers to vaccination.

The trained staff at DIAL can assist with:

Ordering tests.

Understanding instructions for test administration and test results.

Providing alternative instructions for traditional at-home tests for people who are unable to access, read, or understand the manufacturer's version.

For those who cannot use an at-home test, DIAL operators can:

Assist with ordering "swab and send" kits to collect a sample and mail it back for results.

Connect callers to local organizations for assistance locating other testing options in their community, including in-home testing programs or transportation or companion support to visit a community-based testing site.

The hotline can also provide information and resources to answer questions and address concerns about the vaccines and can connect callers to information and services that promote independent living and address fundamental needs, such as food, housing, and transportation. Learn more by visiting acl.gov/dial, emailing DIAL@usaginganddisability.org or calling 888-677-1199 Monday-Friday from 8:00am to 9:00pm EST.

Resources for Reduced-Fare Clients

Metrocards for Seniors and People with Disabilities – Online Application

Seniors and people with disabilities can apply for a Reduced-Fare MetroCard through the MTA online. Click here to learn more about Reduced-Fare MetroCards.

As a reminder, this program is separate from the Fair Fares discounted Metrocard program.

OMNY for Reduced-Fare

OMNY, the MTA's contactless fare payment system, is now available for Reduced-Fare customers. There is no need to re-apply for the Reduced-Fare program - if you have a Reduced-Fare MetroCard, you can make the switch to OMNY immediately. Visit MTA's Reduced-Fare page for more information.

You can now put your Reduced-Fare benefit on a contactless credit or debit card or the digital wallet on your smartphone or wallet at any time, from anywhere, using the MTA's online Digital Assistant. It is as easy as 1-2-3: go to omny.info to create an OMNY account, open the Assistant and enter your Reduced-Fare program info, and enter your payment info.

In order to switch to the OMNY system, customers will need their Reduced-Fare MetroCard number along with the bank card number that will carry the Reduced-Fare benefit. Once the contactless debit/credit or digital wallet is linked to the Reduced-Fare MetroCard, users will receive a success message and can begin using the selected payment method immediately. Those using a physical credit or debit card can tap and go using the physical card at the turnstile. Those using a smartphone or watch need to make sure the card chosen for payment is uploaded into that digital wallet.

Watch a video demonstration of how to make the switch, visit a Customer Service Center or call the OMNY call center at 877-789-6669 for assistance.

Lime Access Program

The NYC Department of Transportation (DOT) partnered with Lime to launch the Lime Access program which provides access to scooters for low-income individuals without smartphones or credit cards. To qualify, an individual must demonstrate participation in an eligible local, state, or federal public benefits program. Individuals interested in the Lime Access program can learn more about the Lime Access program and apply here.

Citi Bike Memberships for NYCHA Residents and SNAP Recipients

Citi Bike, the nation's largest bike share system, is partnering with Healthfirst to expand access to bike share through $5 monthly memberships for NYCHA, JCHA, HHA residents, and SNAP recipients with no annual commitment required.

Click here to learn more about eligibility requirements and apply.

NYC Save for College Program Updates and Resources

Kindergarten, first grade, and second grade students enrolled in a New York City public school - including participating charter schools - now automatically receive a scholarship account invested in a NY 529 Direct Plan, with an initial $100 from NYC Kids RISE, unless their families choose not to participate.

Families participating in the Save for College Program can go to nyckidsrise.org/activate to activate and view their students' new NYC Scholarship Accounts and start earning more money for their educational futures.

The Save for College Program is a scholarship and savings platform that provides families, schools, and communities with a way to work together to invest in and save for children's futures. The public-private-community partnership is designed to make college and career training more accessible and achievable for public school students, regardless of their income or immigration status.

Please use the NYC Kids RISE social media toolkit to learn more and spread the word!

Museums for All Program for SNAP Recipients

EBT cardholders receive free or discounted admission to over 1,300 museums nationwide. Participating museums provide reduced admission, ranging from free to $3.00, to visitors presenting their EBT card. One EBT card can be used to admit up to 4 individuals at any of the participating museums. Learn more about the Museums for All program.

Opioid Overdose Prevention Programs (OOPPs) and Trainings

To expand access to naloxone in NYC, organizations can register to become Opioid Overdose Prevention Programs (OOPPs). After registering with the New York State Department of Health (NYS DOH), OOPPs can order overdose rescue kits at no cost from the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (NYC DOHMH) to give out to clients, patients, staff, and community members.

To register and operate as an OOPP, organizations must meet the eligibility criteria and submit a registration form.

If your organization has questions about becoming an OOPP, email naloxone@health.nyc.gov or overdose@health.ny.gov. You can complete an OOPP application at nyoverdose.org.

Protections for Domestic Workers Under the New York City Human Rights Law

As of March 12, 2022, the New York City Human Rights Law's employment protections apply to all domestic workers, including nannies, home care workers, housecleaners, and any other worker who is employed in a home providing childcare, eldercare, companionship, or housekeeping services in New York City. The coverage of the NYC Human Rights Law was extended to full and part-time domestic workers, regardless of employer size - eliminating the typical 4-employee minimum for employer liability. Additional information and fact sheets in multiple languages are available on the NYC Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) website.

Statewide Workplace Sexual Harassment Hotline

The statewide hotline, 800-HARASS-3 (800-427-2773), is for issues of workplace sexual harassment. The confidential hotline is operated by the New York State Division of Human Rights and connects workers who have faced sexual harassment with experienced pro-bono attorneys to advise them. Click here to learn more about the hotline.
