SNAP Eligibility

Applicant/Recipient

Am I Eligible for SNAP?

How Do I Apply for SNAP?

How can I use SNAP benefits?

Locate Retailers

Work Requirements

Navigating SNAP Quality Control: A Guide for SNAP Recipients

Eating Healthy with SNAP

The One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 changes certain eligibility factors for SNAP. This includes changes to the SNAP work requirements and non-citizen eligibility. We are in the process of updating this page with the changes made by the One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025.

To get SNAP benefits, you must apply in the state in which you currently live and you must meet certain requirements, including resource and income limits, which are described on this page. SNAP income and resource limits are updated annually.

The information on this page is for Oct. 1, 2026, through Sept. 30, 2027.

There are special SNAP rules for households with elderly or disabled members.

Frequently Asked Questions

Am I eligible for SNAP?

Your household must meet certain requirements to be eligible for SNAP and receive benefits. If your state agency determines that you are eligible to receive SNAP benefits, you will receive benefits back to the date you submitted your application.

How do I apply for SNAP?

You must apply for SNAP in the state where you currently live. Because each state has a different application form and process, a member of your household must contact your state agency directly to apply.

You can contact your state agency by visiting your local SNAP office, visiting your state agency’s website, or calling your state’s toll-free SNAP Information hotline. Some states have online applications that can be completed from the state agency website.

Where can I get my state information?

If you are unable to go to or call your local SNAP office or do not have access to the internet, you may have another person act as an authorized representative by applying and being interviewed on your behalf. You must designate the authorized representative in writing.

Note: Please contact your SNAP state agency directly to apply and to request information about the status of your application. FNA does not process applications or have access to case information.

What happens when I apply for SNAP?

In most cases, once you submit your application, your state agency or local SNAP office will process it and send you a notice telling you whether or not you are eligible for benefits within 30 days.

During the 30 days, you will need to complete an eligibility interview and give proof (verification) of the information you provided. The interview is typically completed over the telephone or in-person. If you are found eligible, you will receive benefits based on the date you submitted your application.

You may be eligible to receive SNAP benefits within 7 days of your application date if you meet additional requirements. For example, if your household has less than $100 in liquid resources and $150 in monthly gross income, or if your household’s combined monthly gross income and liquid resources are less than what you pay each month for rent or mortgage and utilities expenses. Contact your state agency for additional details.

How do I receive SNAP benefits?

If you are found eligible, you will receive SNAP benefits on an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card, which works like a debit card. Benefits are automatically loaded into your account each month. You can use your EBT card to buy groceries at authorized food stores and retailers.

When Are SNAP Benefits Available?
(A benefit issuance schedule can be found for each state.)

What Can SNAP Buy?

What is Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)?

Where Can I Use SNAP?

How long will I receive SNAP?

If you are found eligible, you will receive a notice that tells you how long you will receive SNAP benefits for; this is called your certification period. Before your certification period ends, you will receive another notice that says you must recertify to continue receiving benefits. Your local SNAP office will provide you with information about how to recertify.

Who is in a SNAP household?

Everyone who lives together and purchases and prepares meals together is grouped together as one SNAP household.

Some people who live together, such as spouses and most children under age 22, are included in the same SNAP household, even if they purchase and prepare meals separately.

If a person is 60 years of age or older and unable to purchase and prepare meals separately because of a permanent disability, the person and the person's spouse may be a separate SNAP household if the others they live with do not have very much income (no more than 165% of the poverty level).

Normally you are not eligible for SNAP benefits if an institution gives you most of your meals. There are exceptions for elderly persons and disabled persons.

What resources can I have and still get SNAP benefits?

Currently, households may have $3,000 in countable resources (such as cash or money in a bank account) or $4,750 in countable resources if at least one member of the household is age 60 or older, or is disabled. These amounts are updated annually.

However, certain resources are NOT counted when determining eligibility for SNAP:

A home and lot;

Resources of people who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI);

Resources of people who receive Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF; also known as welfare); and

Most retirement and pension plans (withdrawals from these accounts may count as either income or resources depending on how often they occur).

Depending on which state you live in, you may be able to have more resources than the above limits and still be eligible for SNAP. Most state agencies have adopted broad-based categorical eligibility (BBCE), which allows state agencies to align income and resource limits with their TANF-funded programs. Under BBCE, households are categorically eligible for SNAP if they are eligible to receive a TANF or maintenance of effort (MOE) state-funded non-cash benefit. Even if you meet the BBCE income and resource limit in your state, you will still need to meet non-financial eligibility rules and have an income low enough to receive SNAP benefits.

Do vehicles count as resources?

Vehicles count as a resource for SNAP purposes. States determine how vehicles may count toward household resources.

Licensed vehicles are NOT counted if they are:

Used for income-producing purposes (e.g., taxi, truck or delivery vehicle);

Annually producing income consistent with their fair market value;

Needed for long distance travel for work (other than daily commute);

Used as the home;

Needed to transport a physically disabled household member;

Needed to carry most of the household's fuel or water; or

If the sale of the vehicle would result in less than $1,500.

For non-excluded licensed vehicles, the fair market value over $4,650 counts as a resource.

Licensed vehicles are also subject to an equity test, which is the fair market value less any amount owed on the vehicle. The following vehicles are excluded from the equity test:

One vehicle per adult household member; and

Any other vehicle used by a household member under 18 to drive to work, school, job training, or to look for work.

For vehicles with both a fair market value over $4,650 and an equity value, the greater of the two amounts is counted as a resource.

Additionally, the equity value of unlicensed vehicles generally counts as a resource, with some exceptions.

What are the SNAP income limits?

In most cases, your household must meet both the gross and net income limits described below or you are not eligible for SNAP and cannot receive benefits.

Gross income means a household's total, non-excluded income, before any deductions have been made.

Net income means gross income minus allowable deductions.

A household with an elderly or disabled person only has to meet the net income limit, as described on the elderly and disabled page.

If all members of your household receive Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), or in some places other general assistance, your household may be deemed “categorically eligible” for SNAP because you have already been determined eligible for another means-tested program.

Most state agencies have adopted broad-based categorical eligibility (BBCE), which allows state agencies to align income and resource limits with their TANF-funded programs. Under BBCE, households are categorically eligible for SNAP if they are eligible to receive a TANF or maintenance of effort (MOE) state-funded non-cash benefit. Even if you meet the BBCE income and resource limit in your state, you will still need to meet non-financial eligibility rules and have an income low enough to receive SNAP benefits.

The information provided in the table below applies to households in the 48 contiguous states, the District of Columbia, Guam, and U.S. Virgin Islands that apply for SNAP between Oct. 1, 2026, through Sept. 30, 2027.

Table 1: SNAP Income Eligibility Limits - Oct. 1, 2026, through Sept. 30, 2027

Household Size

Gross monthly income
(130% of poverty)

Net monthly income
(100% of poverty)

1

$1,729

$1,330

2

$2,345

$1,804

3

$2,960

$2,277

4

$3,575

$2,750

5

$4,191

$3,224

6

$4,806

$3,697

7

$5,421

$4,170

8

$6,037

$4,644

Each additional member

+$616

+$474

* SNAP gross and net income limits are higher in Alaska and Hawaii.

What deductions are allowed in SNAP?

The following deductions are allowed for SNAP:

A 20% deduction from earned income.

A standard deduction of $217 for household sizes of 1 to 3 people (higher for some larger households and different for households in Alaska, Hawaii, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam).

A dependent care deduction when needed for work, training, or education.

Medical expenses for elderly or disabled members that are more than $35 for the month if they are not paid by insurance or someone else. This is described on the elderly and disabled page.

In some states, legally owed child support payments.

A standard shelter deduction for homeless households of $205.66.

Excess shelter costs as described below.

SNAP Excess Shelter Costs Deduction

The excess shelter deduction is for shelter costs that are more than half of the household's income after other deductions.

Allowable shelter costs include:

Fuel to heat and cook with.

Electricity.

Water.

The basic fee for one telephone.

Rent or mortgage payments and interest.

Taxes on the home.

Some states allow a set amount for utility costs instead of actual costs.

The amount of the shelter deduction is capped at (or limited to) $769 unless one person in the household is elderly or disabled. The limit is different in Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. For a household with an elderly or disabled member, all shelter costs over half of the household's income may be deducted.

Table 2. How to Calculate SNAP Gross Income

Gross Income Calculation

Example

Determine household size . . .

4 people with no elderly or disabled members.

Add gross monthly income . . .

$1,500 earned income + $550 social security = $2,050 gross income.

If gross monthly income is less than the limit for household size, determine net income.

$2,050 is less than the $3,575 allowed for a 4-person household, so determine net income.

Note: This example is based on a 4-person household living in the 48 contiguous states or the District of Columbia.

Table 3: How to Calculate SNAP Net Income

Net Income Calculation

Example

Subtract 20% earned income deduction...

$2,050 gross income
$1,500 earned income x 20% = $300.
$2,050 - $300 = $1,750

Subtract standard deduction...

$1,750 - $217 standard deduction for a 4-person household = $1,533

Subtract dependent care deduction...

$1,533 - $362 dependent care = $1,171

Subtract child support deduction...

$0

Subtract medical costs over $35 for elderly and disabled...

$0

Excess shelter deduction...

See below

Determine half of adjusted income...

$1,171 adjusted income ÷ 2 = $585.50

Determine if shelter costs are more than half of adjusted income...

$700 total shelter expenses - $585.50 (half of income) = $114.50 excess shelter cost

Subtract excess amount, but not more than the limit, from adjusted income...

$1,165 - $114.50 = $1,056.50 net monthly income

Apply the net income test...

Since $1,056.50 is less than the $2,750 allowed for a 4-person household, this household has met the income test.

Note: This example is based on a 4-person household living in the 48 contiguous states or the District of Columbia.

How much could I receive in SNAP benefits?

The total amount of SNAP benefits your household gets each month is called an allotment.

Because SNAP households are expected to spend about 30 percent of their own resources on food, your allotment is calculated by multiplying your household’s net monthly income by 0.3, and subtracting the result from the maximum monthly allotment for your household size.

Table 4: SNAP Maximum Monthly Allotment Based on Household Size

People in Household

Maximum Monthly Allotment

1

$306

2

$562

3

$808

4

$1,023

5

$1,217

6

$1,463

7

$1,616

8

$1,841

9-17

$225 per additional person

18+

$3,887

Note: The allotments described here are for households in the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia. The allotments are different in Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Table 5: Example of SNAP Benefit Calculation

Benefit Computation

Example

Multiply net income by 30%... (round up)

$1,056.50 net monthly income from above calculation x 0.3 = $317

Subtract 30% of net income from the maximum allotment for the household size...

$1,023 maximum allotment for 4-person household - $317 (30% of net income) = $706, SNAP Allotment for a full month

Note: This example is based on a 4-person household living in the 48 contiguous states or the District of Columbia.

What are the SNAP work requirements?

In general, people must meet work requirements to be eligible for SNAP. These work requirements include:

Registering for work;

Not voluntarily quitting a job or reducing hours;

Taking a job if offered; and

Participating in employment and training programs, if assigned by the state.

Failure to comply with these requirements can result in disqualification from the program.

In addition, able bodied adults without dependents are required to work or participate in a work program for at least 20 hours per week in order to receive SNAP benefits for more than 3 months in a 36-month period.

Some special groups may not be subject to these requirements including:

Children;

Seniors;

Veterans;

Individuals experiencing homelessness;

Individuals age 24 or younger and in foster care on their 18th birthday;

Pregnant women; and

People who are exempt for physical or mental health reasons.

Are students eligible for SNAP?

Generally, students ages 18 through 49 who are enrolled in college at least half time are not eligible for SNAP unless they meet certain specific exemptions.

Are non-citizens eligible for SNAP?

SNAP eligibility has never been extended to undocumented non-citizens. Specific requirements for who may be eligible have changed substantially over the years and become more complicated in certain areas. The Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 limits eligibility for SNAP benefits to U.S. citizens and certain lawfully present non-citizens.

Generally, to qualify for SNAP, non-citizens must meet one of the following criteria:

Have lived in the United States for at least 5 years.

Be receiving disability-related assistance or benefits.

Be children under 18.

Additionally, these individuals must also satisfy other SNAP eligibility requirements such as income and resource limits in order to qualify for benefits.

If certain members of a household are ineligible for SNAP, state agencies must still determine eligibility for SNAP for any remaining household members who are seeking assistance.

For additional information see: SNAP Policy on Non-Citizen Eligibility and SNAP Guidance on Non-Citizen Eligibility.

What if I disagree with a decision made on my SNAP case?

If you disagree with a decision in your case, you may request a fair hearing with an official who is required by law to review the facts of your case in a fair and objective manner.

You must request a fair hearing within 90 days of the day your local SNAP office made the decision in your case that you disagree with.

You can request a fair hearing over the phone, in writing, or in person at the local SNAP office.

Although a fair hearing cannot change the laws or regulations governing SNAP, it can ensure that decisions on your case have been made correctly.

Nondiscrimination in SNAP

In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its agencies, offices, employees, and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident.

Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the State or local Agency that administers the program or contact USDA through the Telecommunications Relay Service at 711 (voice and TTY). Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other than English.

To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at How to File a Program Discrimination Complaint and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by:

Mail: USDA Food and Nutrition Administration, George Washington Carver Center, 5601 Sunnyside Ave., Beltsville, MD 20740; or

Email: FNACIVILRIGHTSCOMPLAINTS@usda.gov.

For additional information about SNAP in your state, to file an application for SNAP benefits, or to get information about your SNAP case, you must contact your local SNAP office.

Page updated: October 01, 2026
