Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 15: Eligibility for Medical Only Programs

PM 15-06-00: Income Standards

PM 15-06-02: AABD Medical Income Standards

PM 15-06-02-c: Using AABD Medical Income Standards

WAG 15-06-02-c.

The number of persons included in the AABD Medical Income Standard determines the amount of income and assets used to determine eligibility. When determining excess assets for Medical, always use the asset limit for the number of persons included in
the income standard, along with their assets.

The same income standard and asset limit is used for both adult-only and child-only cases.

When a client is living with their spouse, always use the 2-person standard and asset limit regardless of whether or not the spouse is receiving assistance.

When the client or their spouse has dependent children under age 18 in the home, use the standard for the total number of persons in the home for whom they are responsible, unless the client requests that a child(ren) not be included. The client has
the option to request that a child(ren) not be included in either the case or the standard. But, any child included in the Medical case must be included in the standard.

When a client under 18 lives with their parent(s), the parent(s) must be included in the standard. Also include in the standard all persons living in the home for whom the parent(s) is responsible unless the parent(s) requests that a child(ren) not be
included. Any child included in the Medical case must be included in the standard.

When determining countable monthly income to be compared to the income standard for the family size, include the income of all persons included in the income standard, but do not include SSI income. Also, do not use the income of
persons not included in the standard.

When the income standard includes a spouse or dependent child with earned income and the spouse or child is included in another medical assistance case, use the earned income disregards and exemption (AABD, TANF, or Family Health
Plans) that applies to the type of benefits received by the spouse or child.

Use the Community Standard for clients who:

receive care in a public tuberculosis hospital; or

live in a residential home; or

live in an educational or vocational training facility; or

live in a rehabilitation facility that is not a medical facility; or

live in a facility that is not a licensed medical or sheltered care facility.

The cost of living in any of the above facilities is not an allowable medical expense. See PM 15-08-05 for computing spenddown for persons receiving care in a hospital,
home, or facility.

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
