Home Individuals Medicare Savings Programs in California

Medicare Savings Programs in California

Return to Information for Older Adults

If you or someone you know is having trouble paying Medicare costs, there are ways to save money on Medicare premiums and other costs, like deductibles and copayments.

The state of California has made it easier for Californians to apply for help paying Medicare costs.

Starting January 1, 2025, California will become a Medicare Part A Buy-In State. As a result, eligible full-scope Medi-Cal members who are enrolled in Medicare Part B and qualify for one of the MSP programs called the Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) program will be automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A Buy-In by the state. The state willl cover Medicare Part A premiums for these Medi-Cal members. See the attached flyers for more information or if you qualify under this change.

Starting January 1, 2026, the asset limits to determine MSP eligibility are $130,000 for an individual, and $65,000 for each additional household member up to 10. Assets are things that you own, such as bank accounts, cash, second homes and vehicles. More information about the asset limit changes.

Medicare Part A Buy-In Flyer (this is a pdf file)

Alt: Spanish (this is a pdf file)

You can also visit the DHCS Medicare Premium Payment webpage to learn more.

Californians with an
annual income of less than $22,025 for an individual or $29,864 for a couple are eligible for a Medicare Savings Program. These programs provide help from the State of California to pay for your Medicare premiums, and sometimes your deductibles and copayments.

Think you may be eligible?

The application process for Medicare Savings Programs is the same as Medi-Cal. If you are eligible, you can tell your county eligibility office which program you would like to enroll in. Apply for a Medicare Savings Program, and Medi-Cal, in one of the following ways:

Online at BenefitsCal.org.

By mail. You can download a
Medi-Cal application (also includes Medicare Savings Programs) in many languages.

By phone. To apply by phone, call your local county social service office. You can find the phone number to your local county office here (this is a pdf file).

In Person. You can apply for Medicare Savings Programs or Medi-Cal coverage in person at your local county social service office. You can find your local county office online or by calling the Medi-Cal Helpline at (800) 541-5555.

If you only want to apply for a Medicare Savings Program, you may fill out the application (MC 14A (this is a pdf file)) and mail it to the Medicare Savings Program contact at your local county office. You may also apply by phone with your local county social service office.

For more general information about Medicare Savings Programs, visit Medicare.gov.

Medicare Savings Programs and What Each Provides

Program

Gross Income Limits for 2026* (These Amounts Change Annually) for an Individual

Gross Income Limits for 2026* (These Amounts Change Annually) for an Individual and Spouse

Benefit

Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (Must Be Entitled to Medicare Part A)

Monthly – $1,330
Annually – $15,960

Monthly – $1,804
Annually – $21,640

Payment of Medicare Part A and Part B Premium, Deductibles and Copayments

Specified Low-Income Beneficiary (Must Have Medicare Part A)

Monthly – $1,596
Annually – $19,152

Monthly – $2,165
Annually – $25,968

Payment of Medicare Part B Premium

Qualifying Individual (Must Have Medicare Part A and cannot also receive Medi-Cal)

Monthly – $1,796
Annually – $21,546

Monthly – $2,436
Annually – $29,214

Payment of Medicare Part B Premium

Qualified Disabled and Working Individual (Lost Medicare Part A Because You Returned to Work and cannot also receive Medi-Cal)

Monthly – $2,660
Annually – $31,920

Monthly – $3,608
Annually – $43,280

Payment of Medicare Part A premiums

*Income limits above include amounts that will not be counted when deducted in the eligibility determination. If you have income that is over the amounts listed above, you can still apply because there may be more deductions that may be applied.

Additional Resources

Pub 68 Medicare Information (this is a pdf file)

MSP Application (MC 14A) (this is a pdf file)

MSP Application in Multiple Languages

MSP County Contact (this is a pdf file)

Medicare Part D

Medicare Advantage Information for Dual Eligible Beneficiaries
