September 18, 2025

CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ALL COUNTY LETTER NO. 25-68

The purpose of this All County Letter is to provide County Welfare Departments with
guidance regarding the Food and Nutrition Service published Final Rule, Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program: Standardization of Heating and Cooling Standard Utility
Allowances. This letter also provides guidance on changes to eligibility criteria for the
State Utility Assistance Subsidy as a result of the codification of House of
Representatives 1, An Act to provide for reconciliation pursuant to title II of H. Con. Res.
14. on July 4, 2025.

September 18, 2025

ALL COUNTY LETTER NO. 25-68

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS
ALL CALFRESH PROGRAM SPECIALISTS
ALL CONSORTIA PROJECT MANAGERS
ALL QUALITY CONTROL PROGRAM COORDINATORS

SUBJECT: CALFRESH IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STANDARD UTILITY
ALLOWANCES FINAL RULE AND LIMITATIONS ON WHO CAN
RECEIVE THE STATE UTILITY ASSISTANCE SUBSIDY
PAYMENT

REFERENCE: 7 UNITED STATES CODE (U.S.C). 2014(e)(6)(C)(iv)(I);
TITLE 7 CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR) 271.2;
7 CFR 273.9(c)(1)(vii); 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(i);
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(ii); 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(iii);
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(iv); 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(v);
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(vi); 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(vii);
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii); 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(C);
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(1); 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(G)(2);
7 CFR 273.10(d)(6);
FINAL RULE, SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM (SNAP): STANDARDIZATION OF HEATING AND
COOLING STANDARD UTILITY ALLOWANCES;
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (USDA)
FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICE (FNS) MEMO – SNAP
IMPLEMENTATION OF REGULATORY CHANGES TO STANDARD
UTILITY ALLOWANCES;
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 1 (PUBLIC LAW 119-21);
USDA FNS MEMO – SNAP IMPLEMENTATION OF TREATMENT
OF ENERGY ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS;
WELFARE AND INSTITIUTIONS CODE (WIC)18901.2;
MANUAL OF POLICIES AND PROCEDURES (MPP) 63-504.39;
MPP 63-801.7; ALL COUNTY LETTER (ACL) NO. 14-66;
ACL NO. 14-54; ACIN I-46-25

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Two

The purpose of this All County Letter (ACL) is to provide County Welfare Departments
(CWDs) with guidance regarding the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) published
Final Rule, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): Standardization of
Heating and Cooling Standard Utility Allowances. This letter also provides guidance on
changes to household eligibility criteria for the State Utility Assistance Subsidy (SUAS) as
a result of the enactment of House of Representatives 1, An Act to provide for
reconciliation pursuant to title II of H. Con. Res. 14. (the Act) (Public Law 119-21) on
July 4, 2025.

BACKGROUND

On November 18, 2024, FNS published the Final Rule, SNAP: Standardization of Heating
and Cooling Standard Utility Allowances. This rule amended regulations for calculating
the standard utility allowances, including the heating and cooling standard utility
allowance (SUA), limited utility allowance (LUA), and telephone utility allowance (TUA).
Additionally, it updated the treatment of payments under the
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981, commonly known as the Low Income
Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) or other similar energy assistance program
payments. In California, the SUAS program is used to provide energy assistance
payments to CalFresh households. For more information on SUAS, refer to
ACL No. 14-66, issued September 14, 2014.
On July 4, 2025, President Trump signed the Act into law, which limits the SUAS to
households with elderly or disabled members, and excludes the cost of basic internet
expense when determining the SUA.

FINAL RULE – STANDARDIZATION OF HEATING AND COOLING UTILITY
ALLOWANCES

Standard Utility Allowance Methodology Update

The Final Rule required States to update the SUA methodology to align with
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(C) and expanded allowable shelter expenses to include basic
internet costs. The amended regulations became effective on January 17, 2025, and
States were required to ensure SUA value compliance by October 1, 2025, along with
other annual utility deduction updates.
However, Section 10104 (7 U.S.C. section 2014) of the Act now prohibits basic internet
costs from being included in the calculation of SUA or qualification for LUA.
The California Department of Social Services (CDSS) has submitted and FNS has
approved a SUA methodology for Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2026 that is compliant with
the Act, and which does not include basic internet costs. The new deduction amounts for
SUA, LUA, and TUA was released with the annual Cost-of-Living Adjustments on
September 3, 2025 in ACIN I-46-25.

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Three

SUA Eligibility

The Final Rule implemented two provisions related to household eligibility to receive the
SUA deduction. California is compliant with these provisions.
No CWD action required.
Minimal Expenses – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(1)
The State is required to provide the SUA to all households that incur heating and cooling
expenses, even if the costs are minimal.
Public Housing Residents – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(G)(2)
States previously had the option to include excess heating and cooling costs of public
housing residents in the LUA. The State is now required to provide the SUA to all
households that incur heating and cooling expenses, even if the costs are minimal.

SUAS Eligibility

The Final Rule implemented a series of provisions related to household eligibility for the
LIHEAP or a similar energy assistance program, known as SUAS in California. Current
California policy is aligned with all but one of these requirements related to the treatment
of weatherization payments received by a landlord on behalf of a CalFresh household.
Other Similar Energy Assistance Program – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(i)
No CWD action required.
Receipt of a payment of more than $20 under the LIHEAP or a similar energy assistance
program make a CalFresh household eligible for the SUA. A similar energy assistance
program is defined as a program designed to provide heating or cooling assistance
through payments directly to or on behalf of low-income households. This assistance
must be separate from a household’s rent or mortgage, home energy bills,
weatherization, or energy-related minor home repairs. The SUAS qualifies as a similar
energy assistance program.
Quantifiable – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(ii)
No CWD action required.
The State may opt to consider in-kind assistance as a qualifying payment for the purpose
of making a CalFresh household eligible for the SUA if the assistance can be reasonably
quantified. California is not opting to treat in-kind assistance as a qualifying payment.
Tracking and Documentation – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(iii)
No CWD action required.
The State is required to document the date and receipt of a SUAS payment to ensure the
payment was received in the current month or the immediately preceding 12 months and
exceeds $20 annually. Currently SUAS issuances are automatically recorded in the
California Statewide Automation System (CalSAWS), including the date and receipt.

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Four

Current Month – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(iv)
No CWD action required.
The SUA cannot be conferred based on the anticipated receipt of a qualifying payment,
unless the household is scheduled to receive the payment in the current month. Current
SUAS automation in CalSAWS is aligned with this requirement.
Overissuance – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(v)
No CWD action required.
If a qualifying energy assistance payment is scheduled to be received in the current
month and the payment is not made within that month, the State must assess whether an
overissuance (OI) has occurred. CalSAWS issues the SUAS payment in the current
month, allowing the household to claim the SUA without risk of an OI occurring for this
reason.
Moving and Split Households – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(vi)
No CWD action required.
Households who receive a SUAS payment and then change address or split into multiple
households must maintain SUA eligibility. Current SUAS automation in CalSAWS is
aligned with this requirement.
Weatherization – 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(iii)(D)(3)(vii)
CWD action required.
A household that includes an elderly or disabled member is eligible for the SUA if they live
in a multi-unit or individual unit dwelling and receive a qualifying weatherization program
payment. Weatherization programs increase a home’s energy efficiency, lower energy
costs, and make homes healthier and safer. See the Department of Energy’s
Weatherization Assistance Program for details. A weatherization payment must be
greater than $20.00 and received in the current month or immediately preceding 12
months to qualify. Qualifying weatherization payments made to the landlord of a multi-unit
dwelling are considered a payment made on behalf of the household and qualify residing
CalFresh households for the SUA.
To determine whether a weatherization payment made to a landlord or building manager
of a multi-unit dwelling confers eligibility, the CWD should divide the total value of the
weatherization payment by the number of units in the multi-unit dwelling. If the resulting
amount is greater than $20.00, it is a qualifying weatherization payment.
Proration – 7 CFR 273.10(d)(6)
No CWD action required.
Receiving a prorated qualifying energy assistance payment qualifies a household for
more than one heating or cooling season, given the payment was received within the last
12 months, or the proration period covered at least one month in the preceding 12
months.

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Five

PROVISIONS OF THE ACT THAT IMPACT SUAS

Availability of SUA Based on Receipt of Energy Assistance

The Act amends how states treat receipt of a payment under the LIHEAP or other similar
energy assistance program, including the SUAS.

Treatment of Energy Assistance Payments Made Under State Law

Effective upon completion of automation, payments made under a state law to provide
energy assistance to a household without an elderly or disabled member must be
considered money payable directly to the household. Payments made under a state law
to provide energy assistance to a household with an elderly or disabled member must be
considered an out-of-pocket expense incurred and paid by the household. Therefore, the
SUAS payment will continue to be excluded from consideration as income.
As a reminder, third-party payments that are not owed to the household, such as
California Arrearages Payment Program (CAPP) payments, are excluded from income for
CalFresh per 7 CFR 273.9(c)(1)(vii).

Limitation of SUAS

Effective upon completion of automation, only households with an elderly or disabled
member which receive a payment of $20 or more through LIHEAP or SUAS in the month
of application or the preceding 12 months, are automatically eligible to claim the SUA
when determining household eligibility and benefit amount.
The Act amends language in 7 U.S.C. 2014(e)(6)(C)(iv)(I) to state that: “if a State agency
elects to use a standard utility allowance that reflects heating and cooling costs, the
standard utility allowance must be made available to households with an elderly or
disabled member that received a payment, or on behalf of which a payment was made,
under the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981 (42 U.S.C. 8621 et seq.) or
other similar energy assistance program, if in the current month or in the immediately
preceding 12 months, the household either received such a payment, or such a payment
was made on behalf of the household, that was greater than $20 annually, as determined
by the Secretary.” As defined at 7 CFR 271.2, households with an elderly or disabled
member include those with at least one individual who is 60 years of age or older and/or
disabled and/or receives a disability-based benefit. There is no age requirement to qualify
as disabled. A CalFresh household that includes an elderly or disabled member who is
excluded or ineligible for CalFresh qualifies the household for a SUAS payment, if
otherwise eligible.
As a result of this change, CDSS must update guidance regarding the eligibility criteria for
SUAS payments.

New SUAS Guidance

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Six

SUAS payments will be limited to households who meet the following criteria:
• Are not otherwise eligible for the SUA,
• Are not already receiving the maximum CalFresh allotment for their household
size, and
• Contain an elderly or disabled household member.
There is no change to the receipt of the Homeless Shelter Deduction instead of the SUAS
payment/SUA expense; CalFresh households which meet the new criteria listed above
may continue to receive the Homeless Shelter Deduction if it will result in a higher benefit
amount than the SUA deduction. As a reminder, a CalFresh household cannot receive
both the Homeless Shelter Deduction and SUA.

Implementation and Automation of SUAS Changes

Effective upon the completion of automation, the new SUAS guidance must be applied to
applicants at initial certification. For ongoing cases, household circumstances must be
reviewed, and the new SUAS guidance must be applied at the household’s next
recertification. Households no longer eligible for SUAS must be evaluated for utility
deductions, including SUA, LUA, and TUA, that they may be entitled to.
The CWD must not remove an ongoing household’s eligibility for SUA during the
certification period based solely on the information that the household does not contain an
elderly or disabled member, regardless of the source of information. Even if the sole
elderly or disabled household member is removed from the household, the SUA
deduction must remain. However, if the CWD receives information during the certification
period that the household has begun incurring heating or cooling costs, the change
should be made to the case. The household’s verbal statement is sufficient to verify utility
expenses unless questionable. The CWD must not send a mid-period Request for
Verification (CW 2200) for utility verification for the purpose of making this change.

SUAS Informing Notice

The CF 1 provides SUAS-eligible households with information regarding the SUAS
payment provided to their Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) account. CDSS has revised
the CF 1 to contain updated SUAS eligibility criteria and is included as an attachment to
this letter.
In accordance with MPP Section 63-504.39, the CWD must inform all impacted CalFresh
households as soon as possible of the new CalFresh SUAS eligibility criteria. The CWD
may opt to use the CF 1 or can notify households via other mass noticing practices, such
as disseminating information through news or other media outlets, using social media,
county websites, posters in lobbies or other locations frequented by CalFresh
households.

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Seven

Quality Control

FNS will hold States harmless for Quality Control (QC) purposes for 120 days from the
implementation date of July 4, 2025. A 120-day variance exclusion is permitted for the
misapplication of changes in Section 10103 of the Act to new and ongoing SNAP
households until the exclusionary period end date on November 1, 2025.
QC must apply the verification standards and procedures specified in the
SNAP Quality Control Review Handbook 310. QC will verify all circumstances, regardless
of whether information is questionable, when conducting QC reviews.
CWDs are reminded that the case record must provide sufficient documentation to
support the benefit level determination. Documentation must provide enough detail to
permit a reviewer with no prior knowledge of the individual case to independently
determine the accuracy of benefit allotments.

COPIES AND TRANSLATIONS

Forms referenced in this letter are available on the CDSS Forms/Brochures webpage.
When CDSS completes translations of a form, they are posted on the
Translated Forms and Publications webpage. When made available by CDSS, forms
translated into an individual’s preferred language must be provided to the individual
pursuant to MPP Section 21-115.2. For questions on translated materials, please contact
the Translation Services Section at lts@dss.ca.gov. If translations are not available,
recipients who have elected to receive materials in languages other than English should
be sent the English version of the form or notice along with the
GEN 1365-Notice of Language Services and a local contact number. See ACL No. 22-56.
Per MPP Section 21-115, the County Welfare Departments (CWDs) must ensure effective
bilingual services are provided. This requirement may be met through utilization of paid
interpreters, qualified bilingual employees, and qualified employees of other agencies or
community resources. These services must be provided, free of charge, to the
applicant/recipient. If CDSS does not provide translations of a form, it is the county’s
responsibility to read and interpret the form if an applicant or recipient requests it. See
ACL No. 22-56.
Additionally, the CWDs must provide auxiliary aids and services to persons with vision,
hearing, or speech disabilities, where applicable. More information regarding provisions
for services to applicants and recipients who have limited English proficiency or who have
disabilities can be found in MPP Section 21-115 and ACL No. 19-45.

All County Letter No. 25-68
Page Eight

CONTACT INFORMATION

If you have any questions or need additional guidance regarding the information in this
letter, contact the CalFresh Policy Bureau at CalFreshPolicy@dss.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Original Document Signed By

ALEXIS FERNÁNDEZ GARCIA
Deputy Director
Family Engagement and Empowerment Division

Attachment

California Health & Human Services Agency California Department of Social Services

NOTICE TO CALFRESH RECIPIENTS
IMPORTANT – PLEASE READ
Your household is eligible for a State Utility Assistance Subsidy (SUAS) payment. The SUAS is an annual
payment of $20.01 that will be put on your cash Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) account. The SUAS can be
used for food or cash purchases. If you do not currently have a cash EBT account, one has been set up for
you. This payment allows the county to use the highest utility deduction (Standard Utility Allowance – SUA) for
food benefits. If you no longer are an eligible household (per information below), you will not get the $20.01
SUAS payment. If you want to know more, call your county.
This payment is only given once a year. Only certain CalFresh households can get a SUAS payment.
Households that will get this benefit are those that:
• contain an elderly member and/or member with a disability,
• do not have utility bills separate from rent/mortgage,
• are not already getting the maximum CalFresh benefit for their household size, and
• are not already receiving an increased benefit due to the Homeless Shelter Deduction.

Follow these tips to increase your energy savings at home:

• Weatherstrip around windows and doors
• Wrap your water heater with insulation or install an insulating blanket
• Set the water heater thermostat at 140 degrees or “normal” if you have a dishwasher.
Otherwise, set it at 120 degrees or “low.” Check your dishwasher to see if you can use
120 degree water.
• Replace incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent lamps – they use 75% less energy
and last 10 times longer
• Clean or replace your furnace and air-conditioner filters regularly
• Set the furnace thermostat at 68 degrees or lower, and the air-conditioner thermostat at
78 degrees or higher, health permitting. 3 percent to 5 percent more energy is used for
each degree the furnace is set above 68 degrees and for each degree the air conditioner
is set below 78 degrees
• Repair leaking plumbing and dripping faucets
• Close your shades on windows facing south and/or west to block summer light. In winter,
open shades on sunny days to help warm rooms.
• Defrost frozen food in the refrigerator before cooking
• Use the oven light to check on progress when cooking or baking instead of opening the
door
• Set the refrigerator temperature at 36° to 39° F and freezer at 0° to 5° F
• Turn off lights, televisions and other appliances when not in use
• Unplug computer or other devices that may be running even when off

CF 1 (9/25)
