N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 §§ 398-2.1 - Definitions

State Regulations

Compare

The following words and terms, when used in this Part,
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:

(a)
Active receipt of
SSI.
Active receipt of SSI shall mean an individual or
couple for whom SSA has established an eligible federal SSI payment status code
as defined in this Part, who is in current pay status for federal SSI benefits,
or who would be in current pay status for federal SSI benefits except for
countable income. Such individual or couple must also meet all other State
eligibility criteria for current ongoing SSP benefit issuances as of the time
that the federal SSA electronic data file containing such individual's or
couple's relevant SSI eligibility determination is transmitted to NYS via the
SDX with federal payment status codes as defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part.

(b)
Adequate notice. An
adequate notice is a notice of action that is sent no later than the effective
date of the action and complies with section
358-2.2(a)(2)-(13)
of this Title.

(c)
Aged
person. An aged person is a person who is 65 years of age or
older.

(d)
Aid
continuing.
Aid continuing means the right to have SSP
benefits or SSPNA continue unchanged until a fair hearing decision is issued.
Specific criteria for aid continuing are listed in 398-10.2 of this Part.

(e)
Blind person. A
blind person is a person determined blind in accordance with
federal regulations at 20 CFR part 416, subpart I, and as defined pursuant to
pursuant to section
208 of the
Social Services Law. (Code of Federal Regulations, title 20,
part 416, subpart I, sections 416.901 - 416.999d; U.S. Government Printing
Office, 732 North Capitol Street, NW, Washington, DC 20401-0001. An electronic
location is available from the U.S. Government Printing Office at
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2014-title20-vol2/pdf/CFR-2014-title20-vol2-part416-subpartI.pdf.
Copies may be obtained from the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance,
Public Information Office, 40 North Pearl Street, Albany, NY
12243-0001.)

(f)
Congregate
care. Congregate care is a shared living environment designed to serve
individuals who are unable to function with complete independence. There are
three levels of congregate care settings. Level 1 is "receiving family care" as
defined in section
209
(3)(c) of the Social Services Law. Level 2 is
"receiving residential care" as defined in section
209
(3)(d) of the Social Services Law. Level 3 is
"receiving enhanced residential care" as defined in section
209
(3)(e) of the Social Services Law. Congregate
care does not include nursing homes or medical care facilities.

(g)
Countable income.
Countable income is all of a person's income, in cash or in
kind, earned and unearned, which is not excluded by federal law or regulation
in determining eligibility for SSI. The restoration of any SSP benefit and/or
SSPNA to an individual eligible for current ongoing SSP benefits and or SSPNA
on account of an underpayment shall not be considered countable income for
purposes of SSP or SSPNA eligibility.

(h)
Countable resources.
Countable resources are cash, or other liquid assets, or any
real or personal property that an individual, or couple owns and could convert
to cash to be used for support and maintenance which is not excluded by federal
law or regulation in determining eligibility for SSI. The restoration of any
SSP benefit and/or SSPNA to an individual eligible for current ongoing SSP
benefits and or SSPNA on account of an underpayment shall not be considered a
countable resource for purposes of SSP and/or SSPNA in the month of receipt and
in the nine calendar months following the month in which the individual
receives the benefits.

(i)
Designated representative. A designated
representative is a person or organization authorized to perform
certain specified functions associated with receiving information regarding an
individual or couple, or the management of the recipient's SSP benefit
issuances. A designated representative may only access case-specific
information for periods where they are clearly listed in the SSP system as the
recipient's designated representative.

(j)
Disabled person. A
disabled person is a person who is disabled in accordance with
federal regulations at 20 CFR part 416, subpart I, and as defined by § 208 of
the Social Services Law. (Code of Federal Regulations, title 20, part 416,
subpart I, sections 416.901 - 416.999d; U.S. Government Printing Office, 732
North Capitol Street, NW, Washington, DC 20401-0001. An electronic location is
available from the U.S. Government Printing Office at
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2014-title20-vol2/pdf/CFR-2014-title20-vol2-part416-subpartI.pdf.
Copies may be obtained from the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance,
Public Information Office, 40 North Pearl Street, Albany, NY
12243-0001.)

(k)
Earned
income.
Earned income is wages and earnings, including
earnings from self-employment, in accordance with federal law and
regulations.

(l)
Eligible
couple. An eligible couple consists of two persons,
both of whom the SSA has established with an eligible federal SSI payment
status code as defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part, who are in
active receipt of SSI as defined in this Part, live together in the same
residence, and are legally recognized as married under the laws of NYS, or are
unmarried but are administratively recognized by the SSA as married.

(m)
Eligible individual. An
eligible individual is a person whom SSA has established with
an eligible federal SSI payment status code as defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part, who is in
active receipt of SSI as defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part.

(n)
Eligible spouse. An
eligible spouse is a person who: meets all eligibility
criteria of the SSP or SSPNA program; is the spouse of an SSP-eligible
individual; and is living in the same household with that person. The
individual must be legally recognized as married under the laws of NYS or be
unmarried but administratively recognized by the SSA as married.

(o)
Federal Benefit Rate (FBR).
The FBR is the maximum amount of SSI payable to an individual
or couple with no countable income.

(p)
Federal payment status codes
potentially eligible for SSP benefits.

Those federal payment status codes potentially
eligible for SSP benefits, as defined herein, shall be the exclusive
federal payment status codes reviewed for participation in SSP provided by the
SSA to New York State via the SDX:

(1)
C01 - Current pay

(2) E01 -
Eligibility for federal and/or state benefits based on the eligibility
determination, but no payment is due

(3) E02 - Eligible for benefits but not
payable in the first month

(4) M02
- Force Payment

(5) N01 - Non-pay -
recipient countable income exceeds Title XVI federal benefit rate

(q)
Good cause.
Good cause for failure or refusal to comply, as set forth in
Subpart 398-7 of this Part, includes, but is not limited to, circumstances
beyond the SSP recipient's control.

(r)
Interim assistance reimbursement
(IAR) process. Section 1631 of the Social Security Act establishing IAR
authorizes the recovery of assistance benefits issued to individuals from State
and local funds for basic needs while their applications for SSI are pending,
or whose SSI benefits are retroactively reinstated after a period of suspension
or termination from the individual's initial retroactive payment of SSI
benefits. The IAR process is set forth in Part 353 of this Title.

(s)
Medical Assistance Program.
The Medical Assistance Program, administered by the New York
State Department of Health, provides medical assistance payments for medically
necessary services and supplies for needy persons pursuant to title 11 of
article 5 of the Social Services Law and Part 360 of this Title.

(t)
Minor Child. A minor
child is a person under age 18, or under age 22 and a student
regularly attending school, college, or vocational training and who is neither
married nor a head of a household.

(u)
Notice of action. A
notice of action is a communication from the Office advising a
recipient of SSP benefits or SSPNA of any action that the Office intends to
take, or has taken, with respect to a currently-eligible individual's SSP or
SSPNA case.

(v)
Office. The Office is the New York State Office
of Temporary and Disability Assistance.

(w)
Overpayment. An
overpayment is the difference between the actual amount of SSP
benefits or SSPNA issued to or on behalf of the recipient and the lesser amount
of benefits that the recipient was eligible to receive in any given
month.

(x)
Parental
control.
Parental control is the authority of the
parent(s) to make decisions on the minor child's behalf, regardless of whether
or not such control is actually exercised.

(y)
Public institution. A
public institution is an institution that is operated or
controlled by the federal or state government, or a political subdivision of
the State such as a city or county. The term public institution does not
include a publicly operated community residence which serves 16 or fewer
residents.

(z)
Representative
payee. A representative payee is an individual or
organization appointed by SSA to receive SSI benefits for a person who cannot
manage their benefits.

(aa)
Retroactive benefits.
Retroactive benefits are
SSP benefits, or SSPNA, issued for specific past period(s) of eligibility for
which the recipient received SSI benefits between the month of initial federal
SSI eligibility and active receipt of SSI as defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part or for any
period in which the SSP or SSPNA benefit is reinstated after a period of
suspension or termination. Retroactive SSP benefits, or SSPNA, may only be
issued to an individual or couple currently eligible for SSP benefits or SSPNA.
Retroactive benefits may not be issued to, or assigned on behalf of, deceased
individuals, their payees, relatives, heirs, estates, or on behalf of any debt,
including any debt owed to a congregate care facility where such individual may
have been provided room and board, or any other private or public entities to
whom the deceased SSP recipient may owe any debt or legal obligation.

(ab)
Social Security Administration
(SSA). The SSA is the federal agency that administers
the SSI program.

(ac)
State
benefit rate. The State benefit rate is equal to the
State standard of need for the recipient's applicable State Living Arrangement
minus the FBR or a recipient's monthly Countable Income, whichever is
greater.

(ad)
State Living
Arrangements.
State Living Arrangements are categories
of community living situations or congregate care settings which are criteria
used to establish SSP eligibility and the SSP benefit level of individuals or
couples. Where an SSP recipient receives both SSP and Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits and there is an observed discrepancy between
the living arrangement information reported to SSP by the SSP recipient and the
SNAP case record, the information as regards household composition contained in
the SNAP record shall be determinative for SSP purposes.

(ae)
State standard of need. The
State standard of need is the maximum level of countable
income that an individual or couple may have and still be eligible to receive
State benefit issuances as set forth in section
209 of the
Social Services Law. The term as used in this Part applies solely to the
program of State benefit issuances and has no application to any other federal
or State program or benefit.

(af)
State Supplement Program (SSP).
SSP is the NYS
benefit issuance program by which SSP benefits and SSPNA are administered and
issued.

(ag)
State Supplement
Program benefit. The SSP benefit is provided in
accordance with NYS law and rules to individuals or couples, for whom SSA has
established with an eligible federal SSI payment status code as defined in this
Part, and who are in active receipt of federal SSI benefits or who would be in
active receipt of federal SSI benefits except for countable income, and who
meet all other State eligibility criteria for receipt of prospective SSP
benefits as of the time the SSA electronic data file containing such individual
or couple's SSI eligibility determination is transmitted to NYS via the SDX
with federal payment status codes as defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part.

(ah)
State Supplement Program benefit
levels.
State Supplement Program benefit levels are the
various levels of SSP benefit issuances based on State Living Arrangement,
county of residence and whether the recipient is an individual or a member of a
couple.

(ai)
State Supplement
Program benefit issuances.
State Supplement Program benefit
issuances are paid by NYS to aged, blind, or disabled persons who are
in active receipt of SSI as defined in 398-2.1 of this Part.

(aj)
SSP-only recipient. An
SSP-only recipient is an individual or couple who is
ineligible for federal SSI benefits solely because their countable income
equals or exceeds the FBR but who is eligible to receive SSP benefits based on
the State standard of need and who meets all other State criteria in order to
participate in the SSP.

(ak)
State Supplemental Personal Needs Allowance (SSPNA).
SSPNA is a monthly State benefit to help address personal
needs of individuals who are in active receipt of federal SSI benefits and who
otherwise meet the State criteria necessary in order to receive SSPNA and who
are residing in a residential health care facility regulated pursuant to the
provisions of article 28 of the Public Health Law.

(al)
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
application effective date. An individual's SSI application
effective date is the first day of the month following the later of
the date the: SSI application is filed; or the individual becomes eligible for
such benefits.

(am)
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.
SSI
is a federally-funded program which provides benefits to aged, blind and
disabled individuals based on uniform federal eligibility standards and a
national base payment level pursuant to title XVI of the Federal Social
Security Act and which is administered by the SSA.

(an)
Temporary absence. A
temporary absence is any absence from NYS that does not exceed
three consecutive months, provided that the recipient does not leave the United
States for an entire calendar month during such three consecutive months and
does not evidence intent to establish residence elsewhere. A minor child may be
temporarily absent without time limit if he or she is away from their permanent
residence to attend school and intends to return to their permanent living
arrangement during the summer or extended holidays, or upon graduation or
completion of training and remains under parental control.

(ao)
Timely notice. A
timely notice is a notice of action issued by the Office that
is sent at least 10 days before the effective date of the proposed
action.

(ap)
Timely
reporting.
Timely reporting means the reporting of
change in circumstances and/or any factors which effect eligibility and benefit
amount, as listed in section
398-5.2 of this Part, to the
Office by SSP or SSPNA recipients, or their designated representatives, payees,
or other parties authorized to provide such information in a time period not to
exceed 10 days after the change occurred.

(aq)
Underpayment. An
underpayment is the difference between the amount of benefits
that the recipient was eligible to receive while in active pay status for SSP
or SSPNA and the lesser amount of benefits which were actually issued to or on
behalf of the recipient. Restored SSP benefits on account of underpayments may
only be issued to eligible individuals in active receipt of SSP benefits. SSP
underpayments may not be issued to, or assigned on behalf of, deceased
individuals, their payees, relatives, heirs, estates or on behalf of any debt,
including any debt owing to a congregate care facility where such individual
may have been provided room and board, or any other private or public entities
to whom the deceased recipient may owe a debt or legal obligation.

(ar)
Unearned income.
Unearned income is all income, other than that defined as
earned income, in accordance with federal law and regulation.

Notes

N.Y. Comp.
Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18
§§
398-2.1

Adopted by
New
York State Register September 24, 2014/Volume XXXVI, Issue 38,
eff. 10/1/2014.
Amended
New
York State Register January 13, 2021/Volume XLIII, Issue 02, eff.
1/13/2021

State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release.
More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

No prior version found.

State Regulations Toolbox
