WGIUPD GENERAL INFORMATION SYSTEM 5/26/23
DIVISION: Office of Health Insurance Programs PAGE 1
GIS 23 MA/10

TO: Local District Commissioners, Medicaid Directors

FROM: Lisa Sbrana, Director
Division of Eligibility and Marketplace Integration

SUBJECT: Update to Medicare Premium Payment Process for Individuals Referred From
NY State of Health to a Local Department of Social Services

EFFECTIVE DATE: Immediately

CONTACT PERSON: Local District Support Unit
Upstate (518) 474-8887 NYC (212) 417-4500

The purpose of this General Information System (GIS) message is to advise local departments of
social services (LDSS) and the Human Resources Administration (HRA) of a change in how
Medicare premium payments will be administered for individuals referred from NY State of Health
to an LDSS or HRA and who are enrolled in Medicare at the time of referral. The information in
this GIS updates the guidance previously provided in 2014 LCM-02 regarding Medicare premium
payments for the af fected population and supersedes the information in section V of 2014 LCM-
02.

Under the process outlined in 2014 LCM-02, NYSOH recipients enrolled in Medicare Part B at
the time of referral were given Medicare Insurance Premium Payments (MIPP) to reimburse their
Medicare Part B premiums. Effective January 1, 2023, NY State of Health Medicaid recipients,
who are enrolled in Medicare at the time of referral, are being enrolled in the Medicare Savings
Program (MSP) at the Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) level to pay their Medicare
premiums, rather than being enrolled in MIPP.

The Department's Third Party Health Insurance (TPHI) unit will identify NY State of Health
Medicaid referral recipients who are enrolled in MSP. A list of these individuals will be e-mailed
daily to the appropriate local district or HRA. These e-mails will be sent to the same staff receiving
lists of referral recipients in receipt of MIPP.

Local district staff must determine if these recipients continue to be eligible for MSP when their
post-referral renewals are returned. If recipients are no longer MSP eligible, the Medicare Buy-
In span must be closed, and notification must be provided regarding the discontinuance of MSP.

Please direct any questions to your local district liaison.
