Navigation menu

Department of Health

Individuals/Families

COVID-19 Vaccine

Birth, Death, Marriage & Divorce Records

Health Insurance Programs

Consumer Health Care Information

Community Health

Healthy Lifestyles

Health & Safety in the Home, Workplace & Outdoors

Diseases & Conditions

Data & Reports

Health Topics A to Z

Providers/Professionals

Novel Coronavirus

Narcotic Enforcement

EMS

Health Initiatives

Data & Reports

Diseases & Conditions

Patient Resources

Disease Reporting

Clinical Guidelines, Standards & Quality of Care

Permits, Licenses & Certification

Health Commerce System (HCS)

All Health Care Professionals & Patient Safety

Health Topics A to Z

Health Facilities

Compare Health Care Providers

Adult Care Facilities/Assisted Living

Home Care & Hospice

Hospitals & Clinics

New York State Veterans Homes

Nursing Homes

School Based Health Centers

Health Commerce System (HCS)

All Health Care Facilities

Health Topics A to Z

Health Data

Open Health Data

NYS Health Connector

Public Health Science Center

Data & Reports

About Us

About the Department

Related Sites

Health Topics A to Z

Search

More information about

Medicaid

Medicaid Home

How to Apply

Information for:

Members

Providers

Local Departments of Social Service (LDSS)

Health Plans

Medicaid Rules Are Changing

Medicaid Advisory Committee (MAC) and Beneficiary Advisory Council (BAC)

Medicaid Programs:

All Programs

Managed Care

Child Health Plus

Integrated Care for Dual Eligibles

Medicaid Data and Reports

Medicaid Forms

Medicaid News

Medicaid Update

Medicaid Redesign Team (MRT)

Medicaid Finance and Rate Setting

Archive

Follow NYS Medicaid

Questions

How do I apply for Medicaid?

You can apply for Medicaid in any one of the following ways:

Write, phone, or go to your local department of social services.

In New York City, contact the Human Resources Administration by calling (718) 557-1399.

Pregnant individuals and children can apply at many clinics, hospitals, and provider offices. Call your local department of social services to find out where you can apply.

If you are in a facility operated by the New York State Office of Mental Health, contact the patient resource office.

If you are in a facility operated by the New York State Office for People With Developmental Disabilities, contact the Revenue Support Field Office.

You are Here: Home Page
>
New York State Medicaid
> How to Apply for NY Medicaid

How to Apply for NY Medicaid

Translations

This page is available in other languages

English

Spanish - Español

Chinese - 中文

Traditional Chinese - 繁體中文

Russian - Русский

Yiddish - יידיש

Bangla - বাংলা

Korean - 한국어

Haitian Creole - Kreyòl Ayisyen

Italian - Italiano

Arabic - العربية

Polish - Polski

French - Français

Urdu - اردو

You may apply for Medicaid in the following ways:

Through NY State of Health: The Official Health Plan Marketplace

Enrollment Assistors offer free personalized help.

To speak with the Marketplace Customer Service Center call (855) 355-5777 (TTY: 1-800-662-1220)

Through a Managed Care Organization (MCO)

Call the Medicaid Helpline (800) 541-2831

Through your Local Department of Social Services Office

Where you apply for Medicaid will depend on your category of eligibility. Certain applicants may apply through NY State of Health while others may need to apply through their Local Department of Social Service (LDSS). No matter where you start, representatives will help make sure you are able to apply in the correct location. For more information on determining your category of eligibility and where you should apply read on.

NY State of Health determines eligibility using Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) Rules. In general, income is counted with the same rules as the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) with minor variations. Individuals who are part of the MAGI eligibility groups listed below should apply with NY State of Health .

Adults 19-64 years of age who are not eligible for Medicare,

Children 1 - 18 years of age

Infants (under age 1),

Pregnant Individuals,

Parents and Caretaker Relatives of any age, who may have Medicare.

As part of a multi-year effort to modernize the technology and administration of the NYS Medicaid program, more New Yorkers are now receiving their Medicaid coverage through the NY State of Health. This includes individuals who are part of the non-MAGI eligibility groups listed below.

Dual-eligible enrollees (eligible for both Medicaid and Medicare),

Individuals who are 65 and older not seeking long-term care services,

Individuals applying for the Medicare Savings Program.

Non-MAGI individuals receiving Medicaid coverage through NY State of Health may also get help from a Facilitated Enroller for the Aged, Blind and Disabled.

All other non-MAGI eligibility groups should continue to work with their Local Department of Social Services (LDSS) or a Facilitated Enroller for the Aged, Blind and Disabled. Examples of enrollees who may rely on their LDSS for their Medicaid coverage include:

Individuals who are blind or disabled who do not meet the criteria of any of the above MAGI eligibility groups, including those individuals with an immediate need for Personal Care Services (PCS) or Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS),

Individuals who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI),

Individuals seeking Community Based Long-Term Care,

Individuals participating in the Medicaid Excess Income Program ("Spenddown program"),

Residents of Adult Homes run by LDSS, OMH, Residential Care Centers/Community Residences,

Individuals eligible for the following programs:

Medicare Savings Program (MSP)

COBRA

AIDS Health Insurance Program (AHIP)

Medicaid Buy-in Program for Working People with Disabilities

Foster care and former foster care youth

Individuals screened for Presumptive Eligibility (PE) with a provider

Other factors that may affect your eligibility include:

State Residency

Citizenship or Immigration Status

Family or Household size

Income

Please Note: Applicants will be notified if proof of any of the above factors will be required to complete the processing of their application.

Medicaid Application for Non-MAGI Eligibility Group (DOH-4220)

This application (DOH-4220) should only be printed and completed if you are applying for Medicaid with your Local Department of Social Service (LDSS) and meet any of the criteria listed above for the "non-MAGI" eligibility group, or you are applying for Medicaid with a spenddown.

This application is currently available in the following languages:

English, Spanish, Chinese, Haitian Creole, Italian, Korean, Russian, Yiddish, Polish, Bengali, Arabic

Supplement A (DOH-5178A)

This form (DOH-5178A) is a supplement to the Non-MAGI Medicaid Application (DOH-4220) above and completion is required for many applicants.

This form is currently available in the following languages:

English, Spanish, Chinese, Haitian Creole, Italian, Korean, Russian

Of special interest to persons with disabilities:

If you think that you are disabled, but you do not have a certification of disability (e.g. from the Social Security Administration), you may be eligible for Medicaid even if your income is otherwise too high. You should apply at the Local Department of Social Services (LDSS). When you do, a referral will be made to the State Disability Review Unit (SDRU), where your medical information will be gathered in order to determine if you are certified disabled using the Social Security Administration's disability criteria. It may be necessary for you to have further examinations and/or tests for the disability to be determined. The cost of such examinations, consultations, and tests requested by the disability review unit, if not otherwise covered, will be covered by the LDSS or the State Disability Review Unit.

Please Note: Persons who are denied for reasons of failure to meet the disability criteria are entitled to appeal the disability decision that led to the denial of their application. The decision notice will contain information about appeal rights. See also the section of this page entitled "What are my rights?". Any person dissatisfied with the appeal decision of the New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance may also appeal to the court system.

You may be required to apply for Medicare as a condition of eligibility for Medicaid.

Please review the following information on who is required to apply for Medicare and how to apply: OHIP-0112.

If you are blind or visually impaired many of DOH's forms are available in an alternative format. You may also submit form DOH-5130 (Alternative Format Supplement) to request information in an alternate format if you are blind or visually impaired.

Form DOH-5130 is available in the following languages:
Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Italian, Korean, Polish, Russian, Urdu, Yiddish

Need help applying for MEDICARE?

If you have Medicaid and need help apply for MEDICARE the New York State Department of Health has contracted with several agencies that can help you. Contact one of our Facilitated Enrollers who can help you apply for MEDICARE. Facilitated Enrollers provide free, in person help in your community. To find a Facilitated Enroller near you, please see the list below of agencies, their contact phone number and the counties they serve.

Contact List of Facilitated Enrollers

Frequently Asked Questions

Eligibility

Learn about eligibility criteria for Medicaid, including income levels and what documents are required to apply.

Q. How do I know if I qualify for Medicaid?

A. You may qualify for Medicaid depending on your age, financial circumstances, family situation, or living arrangement. Use the link below to see which health insurance options are available to you, including if your income qualifies you for NYS Medicaid.

NY State of Health, the Official Health Plan Marketplace

If you qualify under a MAGI eligibility group, you will have to provide documents
to verify eligibility if necessary.

If you are applying for Medicaid through the Marketplace (NY State of Health), you may attest to your household income for the upcoming year. If your income is different than the income found on the data matches, income documentation may need to be provided.

Citizenship/Immigration status and social security number will be verified through federal data sources. If citizenship/immigration status or social security number does not match, documentation must be provided.

If you qualify under a non-MAGI eligibility group, the following is a guide to the
documentation that must be submitted to help determine eligibility

If you are a U.S. citizen (born in the U.S. or one of its territories) and provide a valid Social Security Number (SSN), a match with the Social Security Administration (SSA) will verify your SSN, date of birth and U.S. citizenship. If SSA verifies this information, no further proof is needed. The SSA match cannot verify birth information for a naturalized citizen. You will need to submit proof of naturalization (e.g., Naturalization Certificate (N-550 or N-570) or a U.S. passport.

Proof of citizenship or immigration status*

Proof of age (if not verified by SSA), like a birth certificate

Four weeks of recent paycheck stubs (if you are working)

Proof of your income from sources like Social Security, Veteran's Benefits (VA), retirement benefits, Unemployment Insurance Benefits (UIB), Child Support payments

If you are age 65 or older, or certified blind or disabled, and applying for nursing home care waivered services, or other community based long term care services, you need to provide information on bank accounts, insurance policies and other resources

Proof of where you live, such as a rent receipt, landlord statement, mortgage statement, or envelope from mail you received recently

Insurance benefit card or the policy (if you have any other health insurance)

Medicare Benefit Card (the red, white, and blue card)**

*Note: Medicaid coverage is available, regardless of alien status, if you are pregnant or require treatment for an emergency medical condition and you meet all other Medicaid eligibility requirements.

**Note: As a condition of eligibility for Medicaid, if you appear eligible for Medicare, you must apply and show proof of application.
You are required to apply for Medicare if:

You have Chronic Renal Failure or Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS); OR

You are turning age 65 in the next three months or are already age 65 or older; AND your income is below 120% of the Federal Poverty Level (based on the household size for a single individual or married couple), or is at or below the applicable Medicaid Standard, then the Medicaid program will pay or reimburse you the cost of your Medicare premiums. If the Medicaid program can pay your premiums, you will be required to apply for Medicare as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.

Proof of Medicare application can be:

Your award or denial letter from the Social Security Administration, OR

Your on-line confirmation letter stating that you have applied for Medicare with the Social Security Administration.

Apply Now:

https://www.ssa.gov/medicare/

https://www.medicare.gov/people-like-me/new-to-medicare/getting-started-with-medicare.html

Social Security Administration 1-800-772-1213

Q. If I think I am eligible for Medicaid, should I cancel any other health insurance I might already have?

A. No. If you currently pay for health insurance or Medicare coverage or have the option of getting that coverage, but cannot afford the payment, Medicaid can pay the premiums under certain circumstances.

Even if you are not eligible for Medicaid benefits, the premiums can still be paid, in some instances, if you lose your job or have your work hours reduced. If you need help with a COBRA premium, you must apply quickly, to determine if Medicaid can help pay the premium.

You may be eligible for the Medicare Savings Program. This program pays your Medicare premiums and for some consumers, can also pay your Medicare deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments.

If you have Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), Medicaid may be able to help pay your health insurance premiums.

Q. How do I know if my income and resources qualify me for Medicaid?

A. The chart below shows how much income you can receive in a month and the amount of resources (if applicable) you can retain and still qualify for Medicaid. The income and resource (if applicable) levels depend on the number of your family members who live with you.

Family Size

Net Income for Families and Individuals who are Blind, Disabled or Age 65+

Resource Level
(Individuals who are Blind,
Disabled or Age 65+ ONLY)

Annual

Monthly

1

$21,597

$1,800

$32,396

2

$29,187

$2,433

$43,781

3

$36,777

$3,065

4

$44,367

$3,698

5

$51,957

$4,330

6

$59,547

$4,963

7

$67,137

$5,595

8

$74,727

$6,228

9

$82,317

$6,860

10

$89,907

$7,493

For each additional person, add:

$7,590

$633

Effective January 1, 2025. Income and Resource Levels are subject to yearly adjustments.

You may also own a home, a car, and personal property and still be eligible. The income and resources (if applicable) of legally responsible relatives in the household will also be counted.

Expanded Income levels for Children and Pregnant Individuals

Infants to age one and pregnant individuals - 223% of the federal poverty level.

Children age 1 through 18 years - 154% of the federal poverty level.

Monthly Income Effective January 1, 2022*

Number in Family

154% FPL**

223% FPL**

1

$1,745

$2,526

2

$2,350

$3,403

3

$2,956

$4,280

4

$3,562

$5,157

5

$4,167

$6,035

6

$4,773

$6,912

7

$5,379

$7,789

8

$5,985

$8,666

For each additional person, add:

$606

$878

* Income Levels are subject to yearly adjustments.

** FPL = Federal Poverty Level

If a child has too much income and is not eligible for Medicaid, the child may be eligible for Child Health Plus.

Q. If my income is in a Trust, does that impact my Medicaid eligibility?

A. For more information on Trusts, please visit our Trust-Specific information page.

Q. Can I be eligible for Medicaid even if I make more money than the chart shows?

A. Yes, some people can. If you are under 21 years of age, over 65 years of age, certified blind, certified disabled, pregnant, or a parent of a child under 21 years of age, you may be eligible for Medicaid if your income is above these levels and have medical bills. For more information please visit the Medicaid Excess Income Program webpage.

People who are certified blind, certified disabled, or age 65 or older who have more resources may also be eligible.

If an adult has too much income and/or resources and is not eligible for Medicaid, they may be eligible for the Family Planning Benefit Program.

Q. Will there be a lien (legal claim) placed on my estate (my assets) when I die?

If you receive medical services paid for by Medicaid on or after your 55th birthday, or when permanently residing in a medical institution, Medicaid may recover the amount of the cost of these services from the assets in your estate upon your death.

For individuals who received Medicaid under a MAGI eligibility group, the estate recovery is limited to the amount Medicaid paid for the cost of nursing facility services, home and community-based services, and related hospital and prescription drug services received on or after the individual's 55th birthday.

How Do I Request an Assessment of My and My Spouse's Resources for Spousal Impoverishment?

Either spouse, or a representative acting on their behalf, may request an assessment of the couple's countable resources at the beginning or any time after the beginning of a continuous period of institutionalization. The DOH-5298, "Request for Assessment - Spousal Impoverishment" form is used to request an assessment. Upon receipt of such request and all relevant documentation, the local district will assess the total value of the couple's countable resources and provide each spouse with a copy of the assessment and the documentation upon which it is based. If the request is not filed with a NYS Medicaid application, the local department of social services may charge up to $25.00 for the cost of preparing and copying the assessment and documentation.

If you wish to request an assessment of the total value of your and your spouse's countable resources, a determination of the community spouse resource allowance, community spouse monthly income allowance, or family member allowance(s) and the method of computing such allowances, please contact your local department of social services. NYC residents should call the HRA Medicaid Helpline at (888) 692-6116.

Children and Pregnant Individuals

Learn about Medicaid eligibility for children and pregnant individuals.

Q. What are the Medicaid eligible income levels for children and pregnant individuals?

A. Income levels in relation to the federal pverty level are as follows:

Infants to up to one year of age and pregnant individuals = 223% of the federal poverty level.

Children one year of age through 18 years of age = 154% of the federal poverty level.

Monthly Income Effective January 1, 2022*

Number in Family

154% FPL**

223% FPL**

1

$1,745

$2,526

2

$2,350

$3,403

3

$2,956

$4,280

4

$3,562

$5,157

5

$4,167

$6,035

6

$4,773

$6,912

7

$5,379

$7,789

8

$5,985

$8,666

For each additional person, add:

$606

$878

* Income Levels are subject to yearly adjustments.

** FPL = Federal Poverty Level

If a child has too much income and is not eligible for Medicaid, the child may be eligible for Child Health Plus.

Q. Where do I find more information about Child Health Plus.

A. Additional information on Child Health Plus, including how to apply, can be found at: www.health.ny.gov/health_care/child_health_plus/.

Applicants who are Blind, Disabled, and/or Over 65 Years of Age

Learn about specific circumstances for certain categories of applicants.

Q. What are resources?

A. Resources are cash or those assets, which can be readily converted to cash, such as bank accounts, life insurance policies, stocks, bonds, mutual fund shares and promissory notes. Resources also include property not readily converted to cash (i.e., real property)

Q. Can I still keep part of my income if I am in a Residential Health Care Facility or in an intermediate care facility for the developmentally disabled?

A.Yes. Under Medicaid you are allowed to keep a small amount for your personal needs. You can also keep some of your income for your family if they are dependent on you. A spouse who remains in the community may also keep resources and income above the levels shown.

Q. What is a "lookback" period?

A. When applying for Medicaid for nursing facility services (Nursing Home), the local department of social services will look at financial transactions to determine whether any assets have been transferred or given away for less than fair market value during a certain time period prior to your application in order to determine if a transfer of assets penalty period needs to be applied. This is known as the "lookback" period. Currently the "lookback" period is 60 months (5 yrs) prior to the month you are applying for coverage of nursing home care.

A penalty period may be imposed for the transfer of non-exempt assets for less than fair market value. The penalty period results in a period of ineligibility for Medicaid coverage of nursing facility services.

A penalty period is not applied for the transfer of your home to the following individuals:

Spouse

Child under the age of 21

Sibling who has an equity interest in the home and has resided in the home for at least one year immediately prior to you entering the Nursing Home.

Adult child who resided in the home for at least two years, immediately prior to you entering the Nursing Home and who provided care to you which permitted you to reside at home rather than in a medical facility.

For more information regarding the transfer of assets and penalty periods, please contact your local department of social services.

Q. What is a Life Estate? Will it make me ineligible?

A. A life estate is limited interest in real property. A life estate holder does not have full title to the property, but has the use of the property for his or her lifetime, or for a specified period. The life estate is not considered a countable resource, and no lien may be placed on it.

If you or your spouse sell the life estate interest for less than fair market value, it can be considered a transfer of assets and may be subject to the penalty period.

Q. Am I allowed to have a pre-paid burial fund?

A. You may establish an irrevocable pre-need funeral agreement with a funeral firm, funeral director, undertaker or any other person, firm or corporation which can create such an agreement for your funeral and burial expenses. Pre-need burial agreements purchased for certain members of your family on or after January 1, 2011 must also be irrevocable. The pre-need funeral agreement is used towards burial and funeral expenses and is not counted as a resource when determining Medicaid eligibility.

If you (your spouse) do not have an irrevocable pre-need funeral agreement or if the irrevocable pre-need agreement has less than $1500 designated for non-burial space items, you may be allowed to have money set aside in a burial fund. The limit for single individuals is $1500 or $3000 for a couple. Please note, these funds, must be kept separate from any non- burial fund related resources.

Q. If I have an immediate need for Personal Care Services (PCS) or Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS), can I get my eligibility for these services processed more quickly?

A. Immediate Need for PCS/CDPAS: Informational Notice and Attestation Form (DOH-5786).

If you think you have an immediate need for Personal Care Services (PCS) or Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS), you may have your eligibility for these services processed more quickly if you:

have no voluntary informal caregivers able and willing to provide or continue to provide care;

are not receiving needed assistance from a home care services agency;

have no third party insurance or Medicare benefits available to pay for needed assistance; and

have no adaptive or specialized equipment or supplies in use to meet, or that cannot meet, your need for assistance.

If you don't have Medicaid coverage, you may ask to have your Medicaid application processed more quickly by sending in: a completed Access NY Health Insurance Application (DOH-4220); an **Access NY Supplement A (DOH-5178A), if needed; a physician's order (DOH-4359 or HCSP-M11Q or Practitioner Statement of Need (DOH-5779) for services; and a signed Attestation of Immediate Need (DOH-5786) to your local department of social services.

If you already have Medicaid coverage that does not include coverage for community-based long term care services, you must send in an **Access NY Supplement A (DOH-5178A), if needed; a physician's order (DOH-4359 or HCSP-M11Q or Practitioner Statement of Need (DOH-5779) for services; and a signed Attestation of Immediate Need (DOH-5786) to your local department of social services.

If you already have Medicaid coverage that includes coverage for community-based long term care services, you must send in a physician's order (DOH-4359 or HCSP-M11Q or Practitioner Statement of Need (DOH-5779) for services and a signed Attestation of Immediate Need (DOH-5786) to your local department of social services.

If you don't already have Medicaid coverage or you have Medicaid coverage that does not include coverage for community-based long term care services: All of the required forms (see the appropriate list, above) must be sent in to your local social services office or, if you live in NYC, to the Human Resources Administration (HRA). As soon as possible after receiving all of these forms, the social services office/HRA will then check to make sure that you have sent in all the information necessary to determine your Medicaid eligibility. If more information is needed, they must send you a letter, by no later than four days after receiving these required forms, to request the missing information. This letter will tell you what documents or information you need to send in and the date by which you must send it. By no later than 7 days after the social service office/HRA receives the necessary information, they must let you know if you are eligible for Medicaid. By no later than 12 days after receiving all the necessary information, the social services office/HRA will also determine whether you could get PCS or CDPAS if you are found eligible for Medicaid. You cannot get this home care from Medicaid unless you are found eligible for Medicaid. If you are found eligible for Medicaid and PCS or CDPAS, the social services office/HRA will let you know and you will get the home care as quickly as possible.

If you already have Medicaid coverage that includes coverage for community-based long term care services: The physician's order (DOH-4359 or HCSP-M11Q or Practitioner Statement of Need (DOH-5779) and the signed Attestation of Immediate Need (DOH-5786) must be sent to your local social services office or HRA. By no later than 12 days after receiving these required forms, the social services office/HRA will determine whether you can get PCS or CDPAS. If you are found eligible for PCS or CDPAS, the social services office/HRA will let you know and you will get the home care as quickly as possible.

**Note: Individuals with an immediate need for Personal Care Services or Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services may attest to the current value of any real property and to the current dollar amount of any bank accounts.

Application Process and Fair Hearings

Learn about what happens when you apply for Medicaid and how you can request a "fair hearing" if needed.

Q. How long does it take to get Medicaid?

A. Generally, a determination of eligibility must be done and a letter sent notifying you if your application has been accepted or denied within 45 days of the date of your application. If you are pregnant or applying on behalf of children, a determination should be made within 30 days from the date of your application. If you are applying and have a disability which must be evaluated, it can take up to 90 days to determine if you are eligible.

Q. How do I designate or change an authorized representative?

A. When you complete the Access NY Health Care application (DOH-4220) or apply through NY State of Health you may assign a representative. You may allow this representative to apply for and/or renew Medicaid for you, discuss your Medicaid application or case, and/or allow them to get notices and correspondence. You can authorize or change a representative at renewal or anytime in between renewals.

If you recieve Medicaid through your local department of social service (LDSS), you may fill out form DOH-5247 and submit this with your renewal.

If you recieve Medicaid through NY State of Health, you may fill out form DOH-5085 and submit to NY State of Health.

Q. What are my personal privacy rights?

A. Personal privacy rights apply to all Medicaid applications and participants. The New York State Personal Privacy Protection Law and the federal Privacy Act require the New York State Department of Health to tell you what it does with the information, including Social Security Numbers (SSN) that you give the State or sometimes, to your LDSS, about you and your family. The Privacy Act statement is on your application form.

How do I request a fair hearing?

A. If you think any decision about your eligibility determination is wrong, or you do not understand any decision, talk to your application counselor or contact NY State of Health customer service center or your LDSS or HRA, depending on where you applied for Medicaid. If you still disagree or do not understand, you have the right to a Conference and an appeal through a hearing.

If you live anywhere in New York State, you may request a fair hearing or appeal by telephone, fax, online, or by writing. How you make the request depends on who made your eligibility decision; a Local Department of Social Service (LDSS) or HRA, or the NY State of Health.

If your eligibility decision was made at the Local Department of Social Service (LDSS) or HRA:

Telephone: (800) 342-3334 Please have the notice, if any, available when you call.

Fax: (518) 473-6735

Online: Complete and submit the Online Request Form

In Writing: On the notice, complete the space proveded and send a copy of the notice, or write to:
NYS Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance
Office of Administrative Hearings
P.O. Box 1930
Albany, New York 12201-1930

If your eligibility decision was made by the Marketplace, (NY State of Health):

Telephone: (855) 355-5777

Fax: (855) 900-5557

Online: www.nystateofhealth.ny.gov

In Writing: New York State of Health
P.O. Box 11729
Albany, New York 12211

Please keep a copy of any notice for yourself.

Additional Programs and Resources

Learn where to find information on additional NY Medicaid administered programs.

Application and eligibility requirements may vary for each program. Please see the individual program web pages for specific information and criteria.

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)

Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS)

Medicaid Buy-in Program for Working People with Disabilities

Family Planning Benefit Program

Medicare Savings Program

Care at Home: A Handbook for Parents

Medicaid Excess Income Program

Back to top

Questions or comments: medicaid@health.ny.gov

Revised: May 2026

Department of Health

General Information

James V. McDonald, M.D., M.P.H., Commissioner

About the Department of Health

Meetings & Webcasts

Employment Opportunities

Wadsworth Center

AIDS Institute

New York State Veterans Homes

Helen Hayes Hospital

NY State of Health (Health Plan Marketplace)

New York State Physician Profile

New York State Public Health Corps

Contact

Councils and Boards

Grants & Funding Opportunities

Laws & Regulations

Press Releases, Reports & Publications

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)

Forms

Current Issues/Info

Abortion in NYS: Know Your Rights

Bird Flu (Avian Influenza)

Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Program (CDPAP)

Donate Life - Enroll Today!

Drinking Water Protection Program

Ending the Epidemic

Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Health

Long COVID

Measles

Medicaid in New York State

Office of Drug User Health

Polio

Reproductive Health

Vaping and E-Cigarettes

Wastewater Surveillance

Help

Help Increasing the Text Size in Your Web Browser

File Formats Used on this Web Site

Disclaimer

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Language Assistance

English

Español (Spanish)

中文 (Chinese)

Русский (Russian)

ইংরেজি (Bengali)

Italiano (Italian)

Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian-Creole)

한국어 (Korean)

יידיש (Yiddish)

العربية (Arabic)

Polski (Polish)

Français (French)

اُردُو (Urdu)

Website Language Translations

CONNECT WITH US

FACEBOOK

X

YOUTUBE

INSTAGRAM

FLICKR

LINKEDIN

THREADS

BLUESKY
