Editorial Note on Part 435

Editorial Note:

Nomenclature changes to part 435 appear at 89 FR 39435, May 8, 2024.

§ 435.725 Post-eligibility treatment of income of institutionalized individuals in SSI States: Application of patient income to the cost of care.

(a) Basic rules.

(1) The agency must reduce its payment to an institution, for services provided to an individual specified in paragraph (b) of this section, by the amount that remains after deducting the amounts specified in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section, from the individual's total income,

(2) The individual's income must be determined in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.

(3) Medical expenses must be determined in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section.

(b) Applicability. This section applies to the following individuals in medical institutions and intermediate care facilities.

(1) Individuals receiving cash assistance under SSI or AFDC who are eligible for Medicaid under § 435.110 or § 435.120.

(2) Individuals who would be eligible for AFDC, SSI, or an optional State supplement except for their institutional status and who are eligible for Medicaid under § 435.211.

(3) Aged, blind, and disabled individuals who are eligible for Medicaid, under § 435.231, under a higher income standard than the standard used in determining eligibility for SSI or optional State supplements.

(c) Required deductions. In reducing its payment to the institution, the agency must deduct the following amounts, in the following order, from the individual's total income, as determined under paragraph (e) of this section. Income that was disregarded in determining eligibility must be considered in this process.

(1) Personal needs allowance. A personal needs allowance that is reasonable in amount for clothing and other personal needs of the individual while in the institution. This protected personal needs allowance must be at least—

(i) $30 a month for an aged, blind, or disabled individual, including a child applying for Medicaid on the basis of blindness or disability;

(ii) $60 a month for an institutionalized couple if both spouses are aged, blind, or disabled and their income is considered available to each other in determining eligibility; and

(iii) For other individuals, a reasonable amount set by the agency, based on a reasonable difference in their personal needs from those of the aged, blind, and disabled.

(2) Maintenance needs of spouse. For an individual with only a spouse at home, an additional amount for the maintenance needs of the spouse. This amount must be based on a reasonable assessment of need but must not exceed the highest of—

(i) The amount of the income standard used to determine eligibility for SSI for an individual living in his own home, if the agency provides Medicaid only to individuals receiving SSI;

(ii) The amount of the highest income standard, in the appropriate category of age, blindness, or disability, used to determine eligibility for an optional State supplement for an individual in his own home, if the agency provides Medicaid to optional State supplement beneficiaries under § 435.230; or

(iii) The amount of the medically needy income standard for one person established under § 435.811, if the agency provides Medicaid under the medically needy coverage option.

(3) Maintenance needs of family. For an individual with a family at home, an additional amount for the maintenance needs of the family. This amount must—

(i) Be based on a reasonable assessment of their financial need;

(ii) Be adjusted for the number of family members living in the home; and

(iii) Not exceed the higher of the need standard for a family of the same size used to determine eligibility under the State's approved AFDC plan or the medically needy income standard established under § 435.811, if the agency provides Medicaid under the medically needy coverage option for a family of the same size.

(4) Expenses not subject to third party payment. Amounts for incurred expenses for medical or remedial care that are not subject to payment by a third party, including—

(i) Medicare and other health insurance premiums, deductibles, or coinsurance charges; and

(ii) Necessary medical or remedial care recognized under State law but not covered under the State's Medicaid plan, subject to reasonable limits the agency may establish on amounts of these expenses.

(5) Continued SSI and SSP benefits. The full amount of SSI and SSP benefits that the individual continues to receive under sections 1611(e)(1) (E) and (G) of the Act.

(d) Optional deduction: Allowance for home maintenance. For single individuals and couples, an amount (in addition to the personal needs allowance) for maintenance of the individual's or couple's home if—

(1) The amount is deducted for not more than a 6-month period; and

(2) A physician has certified that either of the individuals is likely to return to the home within that period.

(3) For single individuals and couples, an amount (in addition to the personal needs allowance) for maintenance of the individual's or couple's home if—

(i) The amount is deducted for not more than a 6-month period; and

(ii) A physician has certified that either of the individuals is likely to return to the home within that period.

(e) Determination of income —

(1) Option. In determining the amount of an individual's income to be used to reduce the agency's payment to the institution, the agency may use total income received, or it may project monthly income for a prospective period not to exceed 6 months.

(2) Basis for projection. The agency must base the projection on income received in the preceding period, not to exceed 6 months, and on income expected to be received.

(3) Adjustments. At the end of the prospective period specified in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, or when any significant change occurs, the agency must reconcile estimates with income received.

(f) Determination of medical expenses —

(1) Option. In determining the amount of medical expenses to be deducted from an individual's income, the agency may deduct incurred medical expenses, or it may project medical expenses for a prospective period not to exceed 6 months.

(2) Basis for projection. The agency must base the estimate on medical expenses incurred in the preceding period, not to exceed 6 months, and on medical expenses expected to be incurred.

(3) Adjustments. At the end of the prospective period specified in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, or when any significant change occurs, the agency must reconcile estimates with incurred medical expenses.

[43 FR 45204, Sept. 29, 1978, as amended at 45 FR 24884, Apr. 11, 1980; 48 FR 5735, Feb. 8, 1983; 53 FR 3595, Feb. 8, 1988; 55 FR 33705, Aug. 17, 1990; 56 FR 8850, 8854, Mar. 1, 1991; 58 FR 4932, Jan. 19, 1993]
