Mary Killough, Director
Senior HelpLine: 1-800-252-8966 (711 TRS)

Benefit Access Program

The Benefit Access Program offers two benefits for seniors and persons with disabilities.

Transit Benefit

Seniors Ride Free

Transit Benefit

Persons with Disabilities Ride Free

Secretary of State

License Plate Discount

Qualifications

Age Requirements:

65 years of age or older before January 1 of the current year;

You must become 65 years of age this year; or

You must be 16 years of age or older before January 1 of the current year and qualify as disabled.

Residency Requirements:

You must live in Illinois at the time you file your application.

Disability Requirements:

To qualify as disabled, you must be at least 16 years of age prior to January 1 of the current year and be determined totally and permanently disabled (as defined by program requirements) prior to January 1 of the current year.

Income Requirements:

Your total gross income for the last closed tax year must be less than:

$33,562 for a 1 person household (yourself only); or

$44,533 for a 2 person household (yourself and your spouse, or yourself and one Qualified Additional Resident); or

$55,500 for a 3 person household (yourself, your spouse and one Qualified Additional Resident, or yourself and two Qualified Additional Residents).

You must include your spouse’s income if married and living together on December 31 of last year. If your spouse died last year, you would file as single and claim only your income. Do NOT include the income of a Qualified Additional Resident.

To be determined eligible for these benefits, you must submit a Benefit Access Application on the internet. Paper applications are not available.

Apply Online

File your application easily on the Internet.

Apply Online

Start Your Application Now!

Application Guidance & Tools

Expand All
Collapse All

What Happens After You Apply?

Once your application is approved, you can print a certificate of eligibility.

Take the certificate to:

Your local transit authority, or

The Secretary of State's Office.

The license plate discount will be available 10 business days after approval.

If you requested the Ride Free Benefit:

Contact your local public transit system for details.

Note: Your local transit system may have additional requirements for free rides.

Check Your Status

You can check your application status on the website 48 hours after submission.

Important Notes

Processing times to determine eligibility may take up to 8 weeks, depending on documentation.

Please wait 10 business days after approval for your license plate discount to be active.

How do I know if I’ve been approved?

Check Application Status

For Information or Help Applying

Visit a local office of the following:

Senior Health Assistance Program​​ or

Area Agency on Aging

Call toll-free: 1-800-252-8966. For deaf and speech-impaired communication over the telephone, dial Illinois Relay at 711.

Note: Have your Social Security number ready when you call.

Email: Aging.ILSenior@illinois.gov

Download the Benefit Access Flyer

View Flyer in Other Languages

English

Hindi

Polish

Russian

Simple Chinese

Spanish

Traditional Chinese

General Resources List

Eldercare Locator

Housing Locator

Resources for Seniors

Resources for Caregivers

Senior Helpline

Footer

Back to top

Contact the Department on Aging

SENIOR HELPLINE

1-800-252-8966

Helpful Links

988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline

Attorney General's Senior Citizens Consumer Fraud Hotline

BenefitsCheckup Screening Tool

National Elder Fraud Hotline

FEMA Disaster Preparedness Guide for Older Adults

Language Accessibility

Register to Vote

Resources for Seniors

States and Federal Programs for Older Adults
