DATE: April 1, 2025

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS Letter No.:25-08
ALL COUNTY WELFARE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
ALL COUNTY MEDI-CAL PROGRAM SPECIALISTS/LIAISONS
ALL COUNTY HEALTH EXECUTIVES
ALL COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH DIRECTORS
ALL COUNTY MEDS LIAISONS

SUBJECT: COUNTY MEDI-CAL PERFORMANCE DATA STANDARDS AND
CALCULATIONS

REF: ACWDL 24-17

This letter provides additional details on the data sets used to assess performance
measures and more information on how the Department of Health Care Services
(DHCS) utilizes California Statewide Automated Welfare System (CalSAWS) data to
assess performance standards.

Background
On November 25, 2024, DHCS published the All County Welfare Director’s Letter
(ACWDL) 24-17, notifying counties of the reinstatement of performance standards and
enhancements used to evaluate these standards. 42 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) 435.912, requires states to develop performance standards for determining,
renewing, and redetermining eligibility in an efficient and timely manner for applicants or
Medi-Cal members.

DHCS will implement a two-pronged process in the assessment of county performance:

1) Performance Standards:
The performance standard evaluates the timeliness of applications, annual
redeterminations, and MEDS alert processing. DHCS will use data from Medi-Cal
applications, Annual redeterminations, and Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System
(MEDS) alert processing derived from CalSAWS to determine timeliness.

2) Focus Reviews:
Focused Reviews evaluate the timeliness and accuracy of eligibility
determinations, annual redeterminations, and MEDS alert processing.

DHCS reviews performance standards data monthly. California performance standards
are found in the Welfare and Institutions Code (WIC) 14154 (applications and annual
redeterminations) and WIC 14154.5 (MEDS alert processing).

California Department of Health Care Services State of California
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Gavin Newsom, Governor
1501 Capitol Avenue | Sacramento, CA | 95899-7413
MS 4607 | Phone (916) 552-9200 | www.dhcs.ca.gov California Health and Human Services Agency

Letter No.:25-08
Page 2
April 1, 2025

Performance Measures
Eligibility performance is measured using the following three standards: application
processing, annual redetermination processing, and MEDS alert processing. Data is
collected on a scheduled frequency and on the individual rather than case level.

This letter has three sections, each corresponding to a performance standard
measurement: Application Processing, Annual Redetermination Processing, and MEDS
Alerts Processing. If the data measures, calculations, or scope of oversight changes,
DHCS will update the corresponding section(s).

If you have any questions, or if we can provide further information, please email DHCS
at COMSCountyPerformanceStandardsQuestions@dhcs.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Sarah Crow
Division Chief, Medi-Cal Eligibility
Department of Health Care Services
Enclosure (if applicable)

Letter No.:25-08
Page 3
April 1, 2025

Section 1 - Application Processing
Medi-Cal application performance standards are governed by WIC 14154(d), which
outlines the requirements for application processing as follows:

• Ninety percent of the general applications without applicant errors and are
complete shall be completed within 45 days.
• Ninety percent of the applications for Medi-Cal based on disability shall be
completed within 90 days, excluding delays by the state.
Note: Delays by the state are defined as Disability Determination Services Division
(DDSD) caused delays.

In preparation for the reinstatement of county performance standards, DHCS will
measure application processing using the CalSAWS dataset, which includes the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Performance Indicators (CMSPI) 12
data that DHCS receives monthly.

CMSPI Report Indicator 12
Indicator 12 of the CMSPI Report was developed to satisfy CMS’ requirement to collect
the processing time for all Medi-Cal applications during any given month, whether the
applicant was found eligible or ineligible. The CMSPI Indicator 12 Report does not
report California Work Opportunity and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs) applications,
Inter-County Transfers (e-ICTs or ICTs), Craig vs. Bonta (CvB) referrals, or records
transferred from Covered California to CalSAWS in a carry-forward status. The CMSPI
Report Indicator 12 contains individual-level information.

CalSAWS CMSPI Report Indicator 12 Data Definitions

County Code The Identification number of the responsible county, (1-58).
County Name The name of the county responsible for processing the
application.
Case Number The applicant’s case number.
First Name The applicant’s first name.
Middle Name The applicant’s middle name.
Last Name The applicant’s last name.
Date of Birth The applicant’s date of birth.
Client Index Number (CIN) This data element identifies a permanent and unique Client
Index Number (CIN) assigned to every Health Services
recipient via the daily MEDS batch update process; the one
exception being for those cases represented by skeleton

Letter No.:25-08
Page 4
April 1, 2025

records. Once assigned, the CIN never changes, even when
a later change is made to the MEDS-ID (from Pseudo to
Social Security Number [SSN]).
MAGI vs non-MAGI The financial methodology used to determine eligibility.
Application Received Date The date the county received the application that resulted in
an eligibility determination during the reporting month.
Determination Date The date the eligibility determination was made during the
reporting month.
Determination Result The status of the eligibility determination is “Approved” or
“Denied”.
Aid Code The approved applicant’s Medi-Cal or CHIP aid code.
Days Processed The number of days it took to make the final eligibility
determination.
Disability Flag Indicates whether a disability is claimed or whether the health
history in CalSAWS indicates a disability: Y (yes) or N (no).

The status of this flag is not considered when calculating 45-
day timeliness standards because the individual under review
is not being evaluated for coverage on the basis of a
disability.

The status of this flag is considered when calculating the 90-
day timeliness standard in the event the individual under
review was denied eligibility and, thus, no final aid code was
assigned.
Incomplete Application (IA) If the application is incomplete or has errors, Y (yes) or N
(no).
DDSD Delay Indicates if the application is delayed by Disability
Determination Services Division (DDSD); Y (yes) or N (no).

DHCS defines the complete Medi-Cal application as follows:

Application completeness and applications without errors have the same meaning.
“Complete” means that all non-optional questions on the application form were
answered and that all verifications requested from the applicant have been received,
and that no further action is required from the applicant, and only county action is
required because the county has the information necessary to make a disposition of
eligibility or ineligibility. The Single Streamlined application for Insurance Affordability
Programs identifies optional application questions.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 5
April 1, 2025

Note: Counties must perform an ex parte review prior to requesting any documents
from the applicant.

Performance Standards Data Dashboard - Application Processing

The data dashboard will display application processing timeliness rates that are
compiled over twelve months, representing activities during the calendar year, from
January 1 through December 31. The measures are stratified by county and with
statewide totals at the bottom. The application processing measures section of the data
dashboard separates applications by non-disabled individuals subject to the 45-day
processing limit and those disabled individuals subject to the 90-day processing limit.
The following measures are represented on the data dashboard:

45-Day Performance Standard:

Performance Standard: Ninety percent of non-disability
45-Day Processing applications shall be completed within 45
days.
Operational Definition Includes both MAGI and Non-MAGI
(Aged, Aged Medically Needy (MN), and
Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC)) individual level determinations of
eligibility and ineligibility. Identified by the
presence of a non-disability aid code for
determinations of eligibility. Both MAGI
and Non-MAGI determinations of
ineligibility (no aid code outcome
present), which are identified by MAGI
determination type or by non-MAGI
determination type when the disability
indicator flag is not set, does not indicate
“Yes.”

Does not include new applications for
coverage groups, such as SSI/SSP,
CalWORKs, foster care, or other
programs for which DHCS does not
complete the determination of eligibility. It
does not include applications transferred
to CalSAWS as a result of a reported

Letter No.:25-08
Page 6
April 1, 2025

change of circumstances, such as
transfers from Covered California in a
“carry forward” status, Craig v. Bonta, and
intercounty transfers.
Measure: The number of non-disability-based
Number of Non-Disability Based individuals who submitted complete,
Individuals with Complete, Error-Free error-free applications. In accordance
Applications with WIC 14154(d)(1), DHCS excludes
individuals who submitted incomplete
applications and applications with errors
that caused a processing delay beyond
45 days.
Measure: The number of non-disability-based
Number of non-Disability Based individuals whose applications were
Individuals Completed Within 45 Days finalized within 45 days of receipt of the
application.
Measure: Percentage of individual Medi-Cal
Percentage of non-Disability Based applications processed within 45 days for
Individuals Complete Within 45 Days non-disability applications.
Definition: Application Completeness Application completeness and
(MAGI and Non-MAGI) applications without errors have the same
meaning.
“Complete” means that all non-optional
questions on the application form were
answered and that all verifications
requested from the applicant have been
received, and that no further action is
required from the applicant, and only
county action is required because the
county has the information necessary to
make a disposition of eligibility or
ineligibility. The Single Streamlined
Application for Insurance Affordability
Programs identifies optional application
questions.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 7
April 1, 2025

Note: Counties must perform an ex parte
review prior to requesting any documents
from the applicant.

Calculation Numerator: Number of non-disability-
based individuals with complete, error-
free applications processed within 45
days
Denominator: Number of non-disability-
based individuals with complete, error-
free applications.
Data Source CalSAWS provides Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS)
Performance Indicator 12, Client Index
Number (CIN) Level Dataset.
Data Source Frequency Received monthly from CalSAWS on or
about the 8th of the month.
Data Set Availability Currently available to counties on the
CalSAWS SharePoint site on or about the
8th of the month. Upon implementation of
CA-270511, the first generated report is
expected to be available in May 2025. At
this time, counties will be able to access
the report through the CalSAWS Web
Application and will no longer need to go
to the CalSAWS Web Portal.

County Validation DHCS requests that counties validate the
data on or before the 18th of each month
and inform DHCS of any discrepancies
noted by the county.

90-Day Performance Standard:

Performance Standard: Ninety percent of disability applications
90 Day Processing shall be completed within 90 days
Operational Definition Includes non-MAGI (blind and disabled)
individual level determinations of eligibility

Letter No.:25-08
Page 8
April 1, 2025

and ineligibility. Identified by the presence
of a blind or disability aid code for
determinations of eligibility. For non-
MAGI determinations of ineligibility (no
aid code outcome), identified by a non-
MAGI determination type, when the
disability indicator flag is set or indicates
“Yes”.

It does not include new applications for
coverage groups, such as SSI/SSP,
CalWORKs, foster care, or other
programs for which DHCS does not
complete the determination of eligibility. It
does not include applications transferred
to CalSAWS as a result of a reported
change of circumstances, such as
transfers from Covered California in a
“carry forward” status, Craig v. Bonta, and
Intercounty transfers.
Measure: Number of individual Medi-Cal
Number of Disability Based Individuals applications processed within 90 days for
with Complete, Error-Free Applications disability applications (blind and
disabled). In accordance with WIC
14154(d)(1), DHCS excludes incomplete
applications and applications with errors,
and State Disability Determination
Services delays that caused a delay
beyond 90 days.
Measure: Number of disability-based individuals
Number of Disability Based Individuals whose applications were finalized within
Completed Within 90 Days 90 days of receipt of the application.
Measure: Percentage of individual Medi-Cal
Percentage of Disability Based applications processed within 90 days for
Individuals Completed Within 90 Days disability applications.
Definition: Application Completeness Application completeness and
(Non-MAGI) applications without errors have the same
meaning.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 9
April 1, 2025

“Complete” means that all non-optional
questions on the application form were
answered and that all verifications
requested from the applicant have been
received, and that no further action is
required from the applicant, and only
county action is required because the
county has the information necessary to
make a disposition of eligibility or
ineligibility. The Single Streamlined
Application for Insurance Affordability
Programs identifies optional application
questions.
Note: Counties must perform an ex parte
review prior to requesting any documents
from the applicant.
Calculation Numerator: Number of Disability based
individuals with complete, error-free
applications and excluding DDSD caused
delays that are processed within 90 days

Denominator: Number of Disability based
individuals with complete, error free
applications and excluding DDSD caused
delays.
Data Source CalSAWS provided Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS)
Performance Indicator 12, Client Index
Number (CIN) Level Dataset.
Data Source Frequency Received monthly from CalSAWS on or
about the 8th of the month.
Data Set Availability Currently available to counties at the
CalSAWS SharePoint site on or about the
8th of the month. Upon implementation of
CA-270511, the first generated report is
expected to be available in May 2025. At
this time, counties will be able to access
the report through the CalSAWS Web

Letter No.:25-08
Page 10
April 1, 2025

Application and will no longer need to go
to the CalSAWS Web Portal.

County Validation DHCS requests that counties validate on
or before the 18th of each month and
inform DHCS of any discrepancies noted
by the county.

Section 2 - Annual Redetermination Processing

Medi-Cal Annual Redetermination Processing performance standards are governed by
WIC § 14154(d)(3). However, due to the outdated language in sections A and C of the
WIC § 14154(d)(3), DHCS will monitor section B only. WIC § 14154(d)(3)(B) requires:

• Ninety percent of the annual redeterminations shall be completed within 60 days
of the recipient’s annual redetermination date for those redeterminations based
on forms that are complete and have been returned to the county by the recipient
in a timely manner.

DHCS will measure annual redetermination standards using the Renewal Master
Request (RMR) dataset provided by CalSAWS. The RMR is received monthly but
delayed by approximately 120 days to account for the 90-day Cure Period.

RMR Report
The RMR report contains annual redetermination data on the total number of
redeterminations processed, including redeterminations that resulted in continued
eligibility, discontinuances, the reason for discontinuance, and the number of days for
fully processed redeterminations. The RMR data provides information at both the case
and individual levels for MAGI and non-MAGI programs processed by the county. The
data is organized into two separate sets: one for cases and one for individuals. These
two data sets are located in different tabs within the RMR.

Case Level Data (First Tab)
The “case level” tab contains data on cases with active eligibility that have an annual
redetermination due during the reporting month. Cases with cash-linked eligibility are
not captured in this dataset. Mixed cases that include cash-linked individuals and non-
cash-linked individuals are captured in the dataset. Non-cash-linked individuals are
captured in the Individual Level Tab. Case-level data does not break out MAGI and non-
MAGI populations.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 11
April 1, 2025

Definition

Renewals Due This Month* The total number of annual
redeterminations due in the reporting
month.

*Renewals Due This Month: Include all active cases in which an annual redetermination
was due for the month.

Individual Level Data (Second Tab)
The “individual level” tab includes annual redeterminations due during the reporting
month for individuals with active eligibility, excluding those with cash-based or linked
eligibility. Individuals with annual redeterminations due are categorized based on the
MAGI or non-MAGI aid code assigned at the time the "Renewal Due" month begins. For
example, if an individual is non-MAGI eligible when the annual redetermination is due,
CalSAWS will report the annual redetermination as non-MAGI, even if Medi-Cal
eligibility continues under MAGI or non-MAGI. CalSAWS should report the annual
redetermination according to the primary aid code. The primary aid code is the aid code
that ranks highest in the Medi-Cal aid code hierarchy – please refer to ACWDL 17-03
for more information on the aid code hierarchy.

CalSAWS RMR Data Definitions

Total number of Renewals Due The total number of annual redeterminations
due during the reporting month.
Incomplete Renewal Packet The total number of incomplete annual
redetermination packets as reported by the
county.
Total Number Completed The total number of annual redeterminations
due that were completed for the reporting
month. This includes records with continued
eligibility to include both auto and manual ex
parte, and discontinued records.
Note: Annual redeterminations completed
after the Month 3 Post-Due Month will not
be included in the Total Number Completed.
Month Due The total number of annual redeterminations
that were completed during or before the
month they are due.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 12
April 1, 2025

Month 1 Post-Due Month The total number of annual redeterminations
completed 1 month after the renewal month.
Month2 Post-Due Month The total number of annual redeterminations
completed 2 months after the renewal
month.
Month 3 Post-Due Month The total number of annual redeterminations
completed 3 months after the renewal
month.
Total Number of Renewals Completed The total number of annual redeterminations
Resulting in Continued Eligibility that resulted in continued eligibility. The
number includes auto ex-parte, manual ex-
parte, and manual renewals.
Auto Ex-Parte The total number of completed annual
redeterminations using the Federal Data
Services Hub (FDSH).
Manual Ex-Parte The total number of annual redeterminations
completed by the county by manually
verifying data from the Medi-Cal member’s
record, such as Income and Eligibility
Verification System (IEVS), CalWORKs, and
CalFresh data.
For non-MAGI, this includes verifying stable
income.
Beneficiary Provided Information The total number of annual redeterminations
completed using information provided by the
Medi-Cal member.
Total Number of Renewals Completed Total number of completed annual
Resulting in Discontinuance redeterminations that resulted in the
discontinuance from the Medi-Cal program.
Failure to Respond The total number of completed annual
redeterminations that resulted in
discontinuance due to Failure to Respond.
Over Income Total number of completed annual
redeterminations that resulted in
discontinuance as a result of excess over
income.
Other Reasons The total number of completed annual
redeterminations that resulted in
discontinuance for reasons other than
Failure to Respond or Over Income.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 13
April 1, 2025

Reinstatements During the 90-day Cure The total number of individuals who had
Period their Medi-Cal eligibility re-instated during
the 90-day Cure Period.

As a reminder, WIC § 14154(d)(3)(B) states that 90% of annual redeterminations shall
be completed within 60 days of the recipient's annual redetermination date for those
redeterminations based on completed forms returned to the county in a timely manner.
Therefore, DHCS considers annual redeterminations adjudicated within two months
after the redetermination due month.

The performance standard is calculated by adding the three columns titled 1) “Month
Due” (C) + “Month 1 Post-Due Month” (D) + “Month 2 Post-Due Month” (E). Then divide
the sum of the three columns (C, D, and E) by the column titled “Total Number of
Renewals Due” (A). Below is a snippet of the RMR. The columns used for calculating
the performance standards have an asterisk.

Total Incomplete Completion Timeframe
Number of Renewal Continued and Discontinued Eligibility
Renewals Packet
Due
Total Number Month Month Month 2 Month 3
Completed Due 1 Post Post- Post-Due
(B=C+D+E+F) Due Due Month
& (B=G+K) Month Month
(A)* (B) (C)* (D)* (E)* (F)

Reporting Schedule
The report is due to DHCS on the 8th of the submission month according to the
following timetable:

Renewal Due Renewals Processed Months CalSAWS Submission
Month Deadline (8th of the submission
month)
January January - April May
February February – May June
March March - June July
April April – July August
May May-August September
June June – September October

Letter No.:25-08
Page 14
April 1, 2025

July July – October November
August August – November December
September September – December January
October October – January February
November November – February March
December December – March April

The annual redetermination date is defined as the last day of the annual
redetermination due month. The redetermination packet is considered timely if it is
received by the last date of the redetermination due month.

Performance Standards Data Dashboard - Annual Redetermination Processing

The data dashboard will display annual redetermination timeliness rates that are
compiled over twelve months, representing activities during the calendar year, from
January 1 through December 31. The measures are stratified by county and with
statewide totals at the bottom. The annual redetermination processing measures of the
data dashboard represent the percentage of redeterminations due that are complete no
later than two months after the redetermination due month. The following measures are
represented on the data dashboard:

Performance Standard Ninety percent of annual redeterminations due shall be
Ninety Percent completed within two months of the annual redetermination
due month for those redeterminations based on complete
forms that have been returned to the county in a timely
manner.
Operational Definition Includes both MAGI and Non-MAGI individual level annual
redeterminations of eligibility and ineligibility. Does not
include redeterminations as a result of a reported change of
circumstance. For example, reported change (increase of
income), anticipated change (change in age), or transfers
from Covered California or Social Security Administration as
a result of no longer qualifying for CalWORKs or SSI/SSP.
Measure: Number of Individuals due for annual redetermination. In
Number of Individuals accordance with WIC 14154(d)(3)(B), DHCS excludes those
Due for Annual individuals with incomplete annual redetermination forms that
Redetermination were received by the county no later than the last day of the
annual redetermination due month which caused a delay
beyond two months after the annual redetermination due
month.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 15
April 1, 2025

Measure: Number of individuals whose annual redetermination was
Number Completed complete within two months of the redetermination due
Within Two Months of month.
The Redetermination Due
Month
Measure: Percentage of annual redeterminations complete within two
Percentage of Annual months after the annual redetermination due month.
Redeterminations
Complete
Definition: Annual All required annual redetermination forms have been
redetermination forms provided to the county by the last day of the annual
timeliness and redetermination due month. The forms received are
completeness complete, and no further action is required of the beneficiary;
the county has all the required information to determine
eligibility. CalSAWS pulls this information from the CalSAWS
reporting page.
Calculation Numerator: The sum of the number completed during the due
month, first-month post-due month, and second-month post-
due month.
Denominator: Number of annual redeterminations due.
Data Source CalSAWS provides the Renewal Master Request data set.
Data Source Frequency Received monthly from CalSAWS on or about the 8th of the
month. This dataset is lagged about 120 days to capture all
90-day cure period activities.
Data Set Availability Available to counties at the CalSAWS SharePoint site on or
about the 8th of the month
County Validation DHCS requests that counties validate on or before the 18th
of each month and inform DHCS of any discrepancies noted
by the county.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 16
April 1, 2025

Section 3 - MEDS Alert Processing

Regular reconciliation of county and state Medi-Cal eligibility data is essential for
addressing discrepancies between county systems and MEDS and identifying any
processing or procedural issues within the systems.

W&I Code Section 14154.5 mandates that counties process MEDS alerts promptly and
consistently to minimize data discrepancies between MEDS and CalSAWS. MEDS
alerts notify counties and other partners about potential or existing discrepancies in
MEDS records.

MEDS Alerts processing performance standards require counties to process MEDS
alerts that affect eligibility, share of cost, and records that exist on the county’s files but
not in MEDS.

A. Ninety percent of non-reconciliation MEDS Alerts should be processed by the
timeframes indicated below.
B. Ninety-five percent of reconciliation MEDS Alerts should be processed by the
timeframes indicated below.

MEDS alerts received by the 10th working day of the month shall be processed in time
for the change to be effective at the beginning of the following month. Any worker alert
that affects the eligibility or the share of cost that is received after the 10th working day
of the month shall be processed in time for the change to be effective at the beginning
of the month after the following month. Counties may refer to ACWDL 23-14E for the list
of MEDS Alerts that will be monitored under the performance standards.

DHCS will monitor the processing of MEDS alerts using data generated by MEDS, and
the CalSAWS-generated MEDS Alert dataset, which is received monthly.

MEDS-generated alert data includes current and unresolved MEDS alerts. These alerts
are transmitted to CalSAWS for assignment to a County Eligibility Worker (CEW) for
processing. In CalSAWS, the dataset includes both outstanding and processed alerts.

Alerts are categorized based on how frequently they are generated in MEDS and their
impact on eligibility. Category 1 alerts are the most common and have the most
immediate negative effects on eligibility, with subsequent categories representing alerts
that have less immediate negative impacts on eligibility.

Letter No.:25-08
Page 17
April 1, 2025

MEDS alerts are generated daily through various independent processes and are
categorized as follows:

Category 1: Daily update process.
Category 2: Monthly MEDS renewal process.
Category 3: Quarterly reconciliation process.
Category 4: Periodic data matching.

CalSAWS MEDS Alert Data Definitions (SIRFRA 1380)

Alert Number The MEDS Alert number that was generated.
Alert Completion Indicator CEW selected a manual indicator indicating the alert
was resolved; Y (yes), or N (no).
Alert Completion Date The date the CEW marked the alert as resolved.
CIN This data element identifies a permanent and unique
Client Index Number (CIN) assigned to every Health
Services recipient via the daily MEDS batch update
process; the one exception being for those cases
represented by skeleton records. Once assigned, the
CIN never changes, even when a later change is
made to the MEDS-ID (from Pseudo to Social Security
Number [SSN]).
County ID Number The county identification number, (1-58).
MEDS ID The member's MEDS Identification number.
CCN Covered California case number. Note: DHCS does
not utilize this information and will remove this item in
a future release.
Aid Code The Medi-Cal aid code assigned to the individual.
MEDS Creation Date The date MEDS created the alert.
Alert Created in CalSAWS The date the MEDS alert was created in CalSAWS.
Alert Create Timestamp The date and time stamp alert were created in
CalSAWS.
MEDS Alert Available to The first business day CalSAWS made the alert
Worker available to the CEW.

Performance Standards Data Dashboard - MEDS Alert Processing Measures

The data dashboard will display MEDS Alert timeliness rates that are complied over
twelve months, representing activities during the calendar year, from January 1 through
December 31. The metrics are stratified by county and with statewide totals at the

Letter No.:25-08
Page 18
April 1, 2025

bottom. The MEDS Alert processing measures section of the data dashboard
separates RECON alerts by non-RECON alerts as these two alert types have different
performance standards. The following measures are represented on the data
dashboard:

RECON Alerts:

Performance Standard: If received on or before the tenth working day of the month,
95 Percent ninety five percent of the RECON alerts shall be processed
by the last day of the month received. If received after the
tenth working day of the month, ninety five percent of the
RECON alerts shall be processed by the last day of the
month following the month of receipt. DHCS utilizes the day
the eligibility worker receives the alert to determine if the alert
was received on, before, or after the 10th working day of the
month.
Operational Definition Includes RECON alerts identified in ACWDL 23-14E.
Measure: Number of RECON alerts received
Number of RECON Alerts
Received
Measure: Number of Recon alerts completed.
Number of Recon Alerts
Completed
Measure: Percentage of individual RECON alerts processed.
Percent of RECON Alerts
Processed
Calculation Numerator: Number of RECON alerts processed
Denominator: Number of RECON alerts received
Data Source DHCS utilizes a combination of MEDS data and CalSAWS
data. DHCS provides CalSAWS with a MEDS alert input file
consisting of all alerts contained in ACWDL 23-14E that were
generated the prior month, and CalSAWS replies to this file
with a data set indicating what day an alert was made
available to the eligibility worker and what day the alert was
processed or if the alert is unresolved. Unresolved alerts are
carried over to the next month’s report.

For counties that process alerts in CalSAWS, CalSAWS
utilizes the eligibility worker alert processed indicator to
determine what day an alert was processed. For counties

Letter No.:25-08
Page 19
April 1, 2025

that process alerts directly in MEDS, DHCS utilizes the
MEDS database to detect the date when an alert has been
resolved and no longer regenerates.
Data Source Frequency CalSAWS provided dataset is received monthly from
CalSAWS on or about the 8th of the month.
Data Set Availability Available to counties at the CalSAWS SharePoint site on or
about the 8th of the month
County Validation DHCS requests counties validate on or before the 18th of the
month and inform DHCS of any discrepancies noted by the
county.

Non-RECON Alerts:

Performance Standard: If received on or before the tenth working day of the month,
90 Percent ninety percent of the non-RECON alerts shall be processed
by the last day of the month received. If received after the
tenth working day of the month, ninety percent of the non-
RECON alerts shall be processed by the last day of the
month following the month of receipt. DHCS utilizes the day
the eligibility worker receives the alert to determine if the alert
was received on, before, or after the 10th working day of the
month.
Operational Definition Includes non-RECON alerts identified in ACWDL 23-14E.
Measure: Number of non-RECON alerts received
Number of non-RECON
Alerts Received
Measure: Number of non-RECON alerts completed.
Number of non-RECON
Alerts Completed
Measure: Percentage of non-RECON alerts processed.
Percent of non-RECON
Alerts Processed
Calculation Numerator: Number of non-RECON alerts processed
Denominator: Number of non-RECON alerts received
Data Source DHCS utilizes a combination of MEDS data and CalSAWS
data. DHCS provides CalSAWS with a MEDS alert input file
consisting of all alerts contained in ACWDL 23-14E that were
generated the prior month, and CalSAWS replies to this file

Letter No.:25-08
Page 20
April 1, 2025

with a data set indicating what day an alert was made
available to the eligibility worker and what day the alert was
processed or if the alert is unresolved. Unresolved alerts are
carried over to the next month’s report.

For counties that process alerts in CalSAWS, CalSAWS
utilizes the eligibility worker alert processed indicator to
determine what day an alert was processed. For counties
that process alerts directly in MEDS, DHCS utilizes the
MEDS database to detect the date when an alert has been
resolved and no longer regenerates.
Data Source Frequency CalSAWS provided dataset is received monthly from
CalSAWS on or about the 8th of the month.
Data Set Availability Available to counties at the CalSAWS SharePoint site on or
about the 8th of the month
County Validation DHCS requests counties validate on or before the 18th of the
month and inform DHCS of any discrepancies noted by the
county.

Reconciliation (RECON) MEDS Alerts are notifications generated during the MEDS
reconciliation process to inform counties of potential discrepancies or mismatches
between CalSAWS and MEDS.

Non-reconciliation (non-RECON) MEDS Alerts are alerts generated by MEDS to inform
counties of potential discrepancies but are not related to the quarterly reconciliation
process.
