Illinois Must Step up and Meet its Obligation to Fund Free School Meals for all Public School Students

June 23, 2026 | Written By: Healthy Schools Campaign

Illinois has seen recent progress in moving the needle towards fuller funding for school meal programs, but there is more to do. Healthy Schools Campaign (HSC) and its partners in the Healthy School Meals for all Kids coalition applaud the higher allocation included in the Illinois budget that now allows the state to meet its requirement of investing 15 cents per school meal. This lightens the burden for school districts at a very difficult time. But there is much more to do for Illinois to meet its full commitment to provide universal (free) school meals for all Illinois school districts.

Research shows that free school meals help students learn and thrive, and children who are hungry find it hard to focus and learn. A free school meal program removes the stigma for students who receive free or reduced price meals, saves families money, eliminates school meal debt and cuts bureaucratic red tape. Free school meals also play a key role in addressing hunger for all public school students – including children who are immigrants and refugees.

The Healthy School Meals for All bill was passed and signed by Governor Pritzker in 2023, but the state has yet to allocate the $216 million in funds needed to make free breakfast and lunch available to all students. HSC and its partners, including the Illinois Public Health Institute, are focused on building broad support across the state and encouraging lawmakers and Governor Pritzker to fully fund this obligation. The success of this campaign will benefit all districts, including those (like Chicago) that are already providing free meals through the Community Eligibility Provision. The additional funding will help cover their existing budget gaps and provide funds that can be put towards more fresh, local and less-processed food items.

Sara Porter, HSC’s Vice President of External Affairs emphasized the need for the state to fully fund this important effort, “We are excited to see momentum around this issue. More organizations are signing on to our coalition, and our state government has taken an important first step. Free school meals are the right thing to do from an anti-hunger perspective, and a high quality education perspective. All Illinoisans should see how this will help our children learn, grow and thrive.”

HSC and partners have been building support and spreading the word across Illinois about this important opportunity to support students and families. Learn more and get involved!

Previous
A Look Inside Chicago’s Next Four Space to Grow Schoolyards

Next
New HSC Tools Help States and School Districts Measure Progress and Bolster Support for Comprehensive School Medicaid

Posted In

Topics: Illinois Policy, Policy Recommendations, School Food

Latest Blogs

Q&A: Kim Silvey, Illinois State Board of Education’s Principal Consultant on School Medicaid

New HSC Tools Help States and School Districts Measure Progress and Bolster Support for Comprehensive School Medicaid

Illinois Must Step up and Meet its Obligation to Fund Free School Meals for all Public School Students

See All Blogs

Make a Donation

Create a future where every child can learn + thrive.

Donate

Get email updates from Healthy Schools Campaign

First name

Last name

Zip

Email

Form submission subscribes you to the Healthy Schools Campaign Newsletter. To view and manage other options click here.

Hidden Section

HSC Newsletter - Newsletter Campaign ID - New sync process updated 2023

Note - updated to the HSC Newsletter list 1.3.2017 per the updated newsletter configuration

reCAPTCHA helps prevent automated form spam.

The submit button will be disabled until you complete the CAPTCHA.

Contact Information
