Skip to content

Program Operations Manual System (POMS)

Effective Dates: 12/08/2022 - Present
Previous | Next

TN 58 (03-25)

HI 00815.039 Effect of Buy-In on the Individual

A. Routine Buy-In Accretion

SSA will send the individual a notice informing them of the effective date of the
buy-in action.

If the individual is receiving a Social Security check, the SMI (Part B) premium will
no longer be deducted from their benefit resulting in a higher monthly payment. If
the individual was not receiving a Social Security check, but instead was being billed
directly for SMI, direct billing will cease. In both cases, the individual will receive
a refund of any premiums deducted or paid for any month the individual was on buy-in.
Such a refund of SMI premiums is not considered income when determining eligibility
for assistance.

If the individual previously refused SMI or withdrew from it, entitlement will be
established or reestablished effective with the first month the individual was eligible
for buy-in. The individual will receive a new Medicare card indicating the new Part
B entitlement date.

B. Routine Buy-In Deletion

SSA will send the individual a notice informing them of the date the State stopped
paying their Part B premium. The individual will be sent a buy-out notice HCFA-L1636TR
(see HI 00815.201) notifying them of the date the State stopped paying their Part B premium. If the
individual is receiving a Social Security check, the SMI premium will be deducted
from their monthly benefit check beginning with the first month after the month in
which the buy-in terminated. The individual may be liable for up to 3 month's premiums
depending on when the termination was processed. If the individual is not receiving
a Social Security check, they will be billed directly for the SMI premiums. When buy-in
ends they have the option to then withdraw from Part B if they do not want the coverage
to continue. However, if the individual does not withdraw, the premium will be the
base amount even if they had been paying a premium surcharge for late enrollment prior
to being on buy-in.

NOTE:

See HI 00815.042C if the individual states that the SMI deduction is causing financial hardship.

C. Closed Period of Buy-In Coverage

The State may report a simultaneous accretion/deletion action, referred to as a closed
period of buy-in coverage. The transaction will have both buy-in Start (first month
covered by buy-in) and Stop (last month covered by buy-in) dates. For example, “Start
07/2025 Stop 09/2025.”

1. CURRENT CLOSED PERIOD

If the deletion date in the simultaneous accretion/deletion action is less than 3 months retroactive from the month in which CMS is notified of the simultaneous
accretion/deletion, the individual"s SMI coverage will continue even though the buy-in
has terminated. If the individual already had SMI coverage, prior to the simultaneous
accretion/deletion action, and is paying premium surcharge for late enrollment, their
premium rate will be reduced to the standard premium amount for all months after the
buy-in period. Any amount the individual paid in excess of the standard premium will
be refunded to them along with all premiums they paid for the closed period of buy-in
coverage. The individual will have the right to re-enroll in SMI if they terminate
their present coverage. SSA will send the individual a notice informing them of the
inclusive dates of the closed period of buy-in coverage.

2. RETROACTIVE CLOSED PERIOD

In simultaneous accretion/deletion cases when the reported deletion month does not
represent a current period, i.e., when the effective deletion month is 3 or more months
before the month in which CMS received the prescribed notice of accretion and deletion,
the enrollee is awarded a closed period of buy-in coverage and has buy-in coverage
only for the months reported by the State. The State is liable for premium payments
only for those months. If the enrollee had individual coverage and paid premiums for
any of the months in the closed period, premiums for those months are refunded to
them.

The enrollee's current SMI coverage is not affected, i.e., if they have SMI coverage,
it will continue. Conversely, if the individual did not have SMI coverage prior to
the State's action, they are not awarded individual SMI coverage following the period
of buy-in coverage.

However, the records are annotated to reflect the prior buy-in coverage. Also, if
the individual enrolls for SMI at a later date, only months after the buy-in coverage
period will be counted in determining the statutory premium increase for late enrollments.

To Link to this section - Use this URL:
http://policy.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0600815039

HI 00815.039 - Effect of Buy-In on the Individual - 12/08/2022

Batch run: 07/16/2025

Rev:12/08/2022
