Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 15: Eligibility for Medical Only Programs

PM 15-04-00: Use of Income and Assets

PM 15-04-03: Income (AABD)

PM 15-04-03-c: Monthly SSI Benefits

WAG 15-04-03-c.

For a community medical client, monthly SSI benefits are protected income. Do not apply SSI toward medical care costs. When determining countable monthly income, deduct SSI benefits from total gross income and compare the remainder to the
Standard.

See PM 08-02-07-b for the effect of SSI lump sum payments.

Budgeting SSI for an LTC Facility Stay of 90 Days or Less

In general, when an SSI recipient enters an LTC facility, the Social Security Administration (SSA) reduces SSI benefits to $30 per month. However, if a person enters an LTC facility for an expected stay of 90 days or less, sometimes SSI benefits are
not reduced.

During a stay of 90 days or less, SSI benefits are sometimes continued at the regular monthly amount for 3 full months. Receipt of the regular monthly SSI amount provides a means for the payment of some or all of the expenses to maintain a home to
which the person may return upon discharge.

In order for SSA to continue SSI benefits during an LTC stay of 90 days or less:

the person must request the continuation in writing from SSA,

a physician must certify that the person is expected to be in the LTC facility for 90 days or less,

the person must have expenses to maintain a home to which they may return upon discharge, and

SSA must approve the request.

SSA will notify the person if SSI benefits are continued at the regular monthly amount for 3 full months. The notice contains the beginning month of the 3-month period.

If a person informs the Family Community Resource Center that SSI benefits are continued at the regular monthly amount due to an LTC stay of 90 days or less, request verification of the notice from SSA. Once proof is received, do not budget SSI in excess of the
$30 LTC Standard for 3 full months beginning with the first month SSI benefits are continued at the regular monthly amount. Complete adjustments as needed.

If the LTC stay exceeds 90 days, SSA reduces SSI benefits to $30 the month following the month the 3-month period ends.

Budgeting SSI for Other than an LTC Stay of 90 Days or Less

Apply SSI in excess of the $30 Long Term Care Standard towards needs for the month of receipt when a medical client is a resident of an LTC facility, DHS facility, or other medical facility. See PM 15-06-02 for policy on the Long Term Care Standard.

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
