NYSED.GOV

Board of Regents

News

Index A-Z

Translate

Contact Us

NYSED Employment

Business Portal

Home

Programs

Application Submission Process

National School Lunch Program (NSLP)

Summer Food Service Program (SFSP)

Afterschool Snack Program (Snack)

Farm to School

Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program (FFVP)

School Breakfast Program (SBP)

Special Milk Program (SMP)

Eligibility

Financial Management

Administrative Review

SFAs Scheduled For Administrative Review

Findings Summary Documents for Completed Reviews

Procurement

Statutes and Regulations

Guidance

Buy American Provision

Management Companies

Contracts & Extensions

Civil Rights

Training

Upcoming Events

Webinar Library

SFSP Training

Tutorials

CN Snip-its

Master Instructor Training Network

Training Resources

Training Listserv

Search

THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234

Office of P-20 Education Policy

Child Nutrition Program Administration

89 Washington Avenue, Room 375 EBA, Albany, NY 12234

Phone: (518) 473-8781 Fax: (518) 473-0018

To:

School Food Service Directors/Managers

From:

Child Nutrition Program Administration

Date:

Tuesday, September 8, 2026

Subject:

State-Wide Direct Certification Matching Process and Mandatory Reporting of SNAP/Medicaid Eligible Students

Online Direct Certification Matching Process (DCMP)

The Direct Certification Matching Process (DCMP) is a federally mandated procedure that enables School Food Authorities (SFAs) to certify students for free meal benefits without the need for household applications. This process utilizes state-level data from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and Medicaid to identify eligible students and matches this information with student records maintained in the New York State Student Identification System (NYSSIS).

Match Frequency

As part of New York State’s Universal Free School Meal Program, all SFAs must complete the DCMP at least three times during each school year[1]. The first match must be conducted at the beginning of the school year to satisfy federal reporting requirements. The additional matches should be completed in December/January, and again in April.

SFAs with schools operating in the base year of Provision 2 must ensure the maximum number of students are certified for free meal benefits for each month of the base year. For these schools, DCMP should be conducted at the beginning of the school year, before distributing household applications and parent letters, and each month thereafter. This ongoing practice helps maximize certification rates and ensures accurate federal reimbursement levels in the base year and in future non-base years.

DCMP System Access

The NYSSIS system and State Match functionality are available through the NYSED Application Business Portal (https://portal.nysed.gov/abp).

State-level DCMP Functions

State Matches - provides access to direct certification data pre-matched to your students using the student’s NYSSIS ID. Check here first for your eligible students.

Search - allows you to search direct certification lists with or without student NYSSIS IDs (SNAP & Medicaid).

Bulk Search - allows you to perform a batch search of direct certification lists, with or without student NYSIS IDs by uploading a file listing multiple student records.

Student Eligibility Effective Date

The effective date of a student’s eligibility for direct certification is determined by the date of the automated data matching file that first identifies the student as eligible, not the date on which the SFA accesses or processes the file in its local point-of-service system. This date is displayed in the “DC Eligibility Date” column of the match results.

Mandatory Reporting of SNAP and Medicaid Eligibles Due Before Filing the September Claim for Reimbursement

At the start of each school year, SFAs must report in the Child Nutrition Management System (CNMS) the number of students directly certified through SNAP and Medicaid matches, including any extensions of eligibility to other household members, for each school. SFAs will be prompted to enter this information before submitting their September reimbursement claim.

To access the report:

Sign into CNMS with login information

Select SFA Annual Information

Select applicable school year

Click on SNAP & Medicaid Certified Entry link

This report is required for federal reporting (FNS-742 Verification Summary, FNS-834 DC Rate Data Element Report, and CEP Notification List) and other NYSED education reporting purposes (UEI, Title 1, State Aid, etc.).

State Match System Instructions/Guidance Documents

Use the links below to access the instructions, checklist, and sample letters related to the DCMP.

Note: Due to ongoing updates and system improvements, the screenshots and descriptions in the guidance documents may not exactly match the current DCMP website. However, the core functionality remains unchanged.

Please be aware that the Child Nutrition Program Office does not have the authority to grant access to the NYSSIS State Match System or make account updates. For detailed steps on how to assign NYSSIS State Match entitlements, refer to the link titled "How to Grant NYSSIS State Match Entitlements."

State Match User Document

State Match User FAQ Updated July 2025

How to Grant NYSSIS State Match Entitlements

Prototype Notification Letter - English (Editable Version)

Reset My DCMP Password

If you have any questions, please contact your Child Nutrition Program Representative.

[1] DCMP remains optional for schools participating in the Special Milk Program only.

Popular Topics

Accommodating Children with Disabilities

"And Justice For All" Posters

Annual Checklist

Child Nutrition Spotlight

Community Eligibility Provision

Direct Certification Matching Process

Disclosure

Eligibility

Equipment Purchases Approval Process

Food Based Menu Planning

Food Service Management Company

Forms

Grants

HACCP/Sanitation

Indirect Cost Guidance

Local School Wellness Policy

Nonprofit School Food Service Account

Preschool/Prekindergarten

Professional Standards

Program Integrity Final Rule

Public Reports

Recalls

Regulations

Reimbursement Rates

Smart Snacks in School

Verification

How Do I…?

Add a Program

Add a Recipient Agency

Add a User to CNMS

Adjust a Claim

Appeal A State Agency

Become a New SFA

Change My CNMS Password

Complete the Health Inspection Report

Conduct a Self-review

Determine Selling Prices

Find Free Summer Meals

Nominate a Person/Program for the CN Spotlight

Renew SAMS Registration

Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse

Request a Breakfast After the Bell Waiver

Reset my CNMS password

Reset My DCMP Password

Submit a Claim

Terminate Participation

Update my CNMS Administrator

Quick Links

CDC

CACFP

DUNS

Food Buying Guide

FRAC School Breakfast

Hunger Solutions

Information and Reporting Services

Institute of Child Nutrition (previously NFSMI)

MyBenefits

NYS Dept of Agriculture and Markets: Farm to School

NYS DOH CACFP

NYS OCFS Foster Care Contacts

NYS-TEACHS

OGS

School Nutrition Association

SED Charter School Office

SEDREF Information Page

SEDREF Query

SAM

Team Nutrition

USDA

WellSAT

WIC Strong

Media Center

Newsletters

Video Gallery

Subscribe

Facebook

X (Formerly Twitter)

Instagram

LinkedIn

New York State Education Building

89 Washington Avenue

Albany, NY 12234

CONTACT US

NYSED General Information: (518) 474-3852

ACCES-VR: 1-800-222-JOBS (5627)

TASC (formerly GED): (518) 474-5906

New York State Archives: (518) 474-6926

New York State Library: (518) 474-5355

New York State Museum: (518) 474-5877

Office of Higher Education: (518) 486-3633

Office of the Professions: (518) 474-3817

P-12 Education: (518) 474-3862

EMAIL CONTACTS

Adult Education & Vocational Services

New York State Archives

New York State Library

New York State Museum

Office of Higher Education

Office of the Professions

P-12 Education

USDA Nondiscrimination Statement

In accordance with federal civil rights law and USDA civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its agencies, offices, employees, and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident.

Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the state or local agency that administers the program or contact USDA through the Telecommunications Relay Service at 711 (voice and TTY). Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other than English.

To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at How to File a Program Discrimination Complaint and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by:

Mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Mail Stop 9410, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410;

Fax: (202) 690-7442; or

Email: program.intake@usda.gov.

USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.

Diversity & Access | Public Records (FOIL) | Accessibility | Public Records (FOIL) | Internet Privacy Policy | Disclaimer

Top
