N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 §§ 398-1.1 - Scope and purpose

State Regulations

Compare

The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, as
enacted under title XVI of the Social Security Act, provides benefits to aged,
blind and disabled individuals and couples based upon uniform eligibility
standards and a national base payment level for SSI benefits. Pursuant to title
XVI of the Social Security Act, SSI is a federally funded program administered
by the Social Security Administration (SSA). States have the option to provide
additional payments to supplement the basic federal SSI payment. New York State
(NYS) chose to establish such a program of State benefit issuances. NYS
provides eligible individuals and couples such State benefit issuances to help
support their current needs. Such benefit issuances are intended to support
current and ongoing needs and are not intended to otherwise retroactively
redress any claimed need for support with regard to past periods of SSI
eligibility where such individual or couple is no longer eligible for such
benefit issuance. There are two categories of such State benefit issuances: the
State Supplement Program (SSP) benefits, and the State Supplemental Personal
Needs Allowance (SSPNA). The Commissioner of the NYS Office of Temporary and
Disability Assistance (hereafter referred to as the Office) is responsible for
the administration of all State benefits. NYS provides monthly benefits to
individuals and couples who are in active receipt of federal SSI benefits as
defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part and who meet
all other eligibility criteria to receive current ongoing SSP benefits as of
the time that the federal SSA electronic data file containing such individual's
or couple's relevant SSI eligibility determination is transmitted to NYS via
the State Data Exchange (SDX) with federal payment status codes as defined in
section 398-2.1 of this Part. SSP benefits
may not be issued to, or assigned on behalf of, deceased individuals, their
payees, relatives, heirs, estates or on behalf of any debt, including any debt
owed to a congregate care facility where such individual may have been provided
care, room and board, or any other private or public entities to whom the
deceased SSP recipient may owe any debt or legal obligation. Individuals or
couples who meet the eligibility criteria for active receipt of SSI benefits as
defined in section
398-2.1 of this Part, but who
reside in a residential health care facility regulated pursuant to the
provisions of article 28 of the Public Health Law may receive SSPNA.

Notes

N.Y. Comp.
Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18
§§
398-1.1

Adopted by
New
York State Register September 24, 2014/Volume XXXVI, Issue 38,
eff. 10/1/2014.
Amended
New
York State Register January 13, 2021/Volume XLIII, Issue 02, eff.
1/13/2021

State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release.
More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

No prior version found.

State Regulations Toolbox
