Changes to Medicaid Coverage

Publication Date: October 6, 2026

Why is Medicaid Changing?

H.R.1, or the “One Big, Beautiful Bill” is a 2025 federal law that changes some rules for Medicaid. These changes will have broad impacts on Medicaid members. We have established this page to provide important information to navigate these new laws. You can stay up to date with H.R.1 information from NY State of Health by:

Signing up for our email updates

Following us on Social Media

Bookmarking this page and checking for updates

What Are the Changes and When Do They Start?

October 1, 2026

Eligibility Rules

Some adults may no longer qualify for Medicaid due to changes in eligibility rules based on immigration status.

Learn more about changes based on immigration status.

January 1, 2027

Work Requirements for Medicaid Coverage

Some adults ages 19–64 will have new work requirements for Medicaid coverage and may need to show that they are working, in school, in job training, or volunteering. These requirements will be reviewed when you apply or renew your coverage.

Learn more about work requirements for Medicaid coverage.

6 Month Renewals

Some adults ages 19–64 will need to renew their Medicaid every 6 months instead of once a year.

Learn more about Medicaid renewals.

Retroactive Coverage

Medicaid will not cover past medical bills as far back as is allowed today.

Learn more about these changes to retroactive coverage.

What Should I Do Now?

Before anything changes, we will tell you exactly what you need to do to keep your Medicaid coverage.

Make sure NY State of Health has your current address, phone number, and email so that we can contact you with important information.

When you get notices, texts, emails, or calls from NY State of Health or your health plan, open them.

If you enrolled in Medicaid through NY State of Health, you can update your contact information in these ways:

Go to your NY State of Health account at nystateofhealth.ny.gov.

Meet with an enrollment assistor who can help you update your account.

Call the NY State of Health Customer Service Center at 1-855-329-8850 (TTY: 1-800-662-1220).

Download the NYSOH Mobile Upload app from the App Store or Google Play.

Learn more about how to update your contact information with NY State of Health.

Some New Yorkers enroll in Medicaid through their county's Local Department of Social Services. A small number of these people will also need to follow new federal rules. If you enrolled in Medicaid with your county's Local Department of Social Services, contact that office to update your information.

How is Coverage Changing for Immigrants?

Starting on October 1, 2026, some immigrants might see a change in their health coverage due to federal funding cuts to Medicaid. These changes apply to:

Refugees

Asylees (someone who fled their country for safety)

Parolees (someone allowed into the U.S. for temporary reasons)

Survivors of domestic violence or human trafficking

What Happens If I Am in One of the Affected Groups?

If you belong to one of the affected immigration groups, your health plan coverage may change from Medicaid to the Essential Plan. You will not experience a change in your benefits as a result.

If you get tax credits to help pay for your insurance, the state will review your account in the fall. Any changes to your costs will start in 2027.

There will be no changes to coverage for children and pregnant people. Health coverage for children, pregnant individuals, and those who recently gave birth will not change.

How do I know if I am in one of the affected groups?

If you were already enrolled in Medicaid:

NY State of Health automatically looked at your account to see if you are affected.​

You received a letter, text, or WhatsApp message between September 1 and September 4, 2026. It explained exactly how these changes affect your health plan.

NY State of Health may send you a notice asking for more information about your immigration status so it can determine the right health care plan for you. Please make sure you open and respond to any mail, email, or messages.

If you are newly applying for Medicaid:

The NY State of Health website updated its questions to make it easier for immigrants and citizens to apply for coverage.​

Work Requirements for Medicaid Coverage

Starting on January 1, 2027, some adults ages 19–64 will have new work requirements for Medicaid coverage and may need to show that they are working, in school, in job training, or volunteering. These requirements will be reviewed when you apply or renew your coverage.

You can do these things to meet the requirements:

A) Earn income of at least $580 per month

B) Complete at least 80 hours per month of any of the following activities, or a combination of them:

Work in a job

Go to school at least half time

Join a job training or work program

Volunteer or help out in your community

C) Earn some income and complete some hours of approved activities (B above) each month

For example, if you earn $380 per month, that equals 52 hours when using the federal minimum wage of $7.25 ($380/$7.25 = 52). To meet the 80 hours of approved activities, you would need to do 28 more hours of any of the activities in B above.

Will the Work Requirements for Medicaid Coverage Rule Affect Me?

Some people will not have to complete the work requirements, including people who are:

18 years old or younger

65 years old or older

Pregnant, or were pregnant in the last 12 months

Enrolled in Medicaid with a disability

Diagnosed with a physical or mental health condition that makes it hard to work

Entitled to, or enrolled in Medicare Part A or enrolled in Part B

American Indian or Alaska Native

A parent, guardian, caretaker relative, or family caregiver to a disabled individual

A parent, guardian, caretaker relative, or family caregiver to a child under 14

In a SNAP household, and subject to SNAP work requirements

Enrolled in TANF and meeting TANF work requirements

In a program to help with drug or alcohol use

Currently in jail or prison, or released in the last 3 months

Currently in foster care

Under 26 and aged out of foster care

A veteran with a total disability ​

Important Note: You may need to meet certain conditions or show proof that you fit one of these exceptions when you renew your Medicaid coverage.

Will NY State of Health Tell Me if Work Requirements Apply to Me?

Yes, by September 30, 2026, NY State of Health will notify you by mail (or email) about upcoming Medicaid changes. This notice will explain what to expect and what you may need to do to meet the requirements.

If you do not receive a notice, the requirements may not apply to you.

Important note: Nothing is changing with your coverage at the time you receive the notice. You just need to keep your contact information up to date with NY State of Health.

Will There Be Temporary Exceptions to the Rule?

Yes, you may not have to follow this rule if the following temporary exceptions apply to you:

A) You were in the hospital or a nursing facility

B) You or a dependent had to travel for serious medical care not offered in your community

C) You live in an area where the federal government declared an emergency or disaster

D) You live in an area with very high unemployment

For A and B temporary exceptions, you need to provide information on your Medicaid application. For C and D temporary exceptions, New York State will let you know if those apply to you.

Frequently Asked Questions about Work Requirements for Medicaid Coverage

Income Types

What types of income count toward the $580 monthly income amount needed to meet the requirements?

Income that will count includes:

Taxable wages (from your job)

Self-employment income, like owning your own business or contractor work

Gig work income, like DoorDash or Uber

Tips

Unemployment payments

Social Security income

Social Security Disability Income (SSDI)

Retirement or pension income

Certain investment, rental, or other taxable income

Some types of income will NOT count. These include:

Supplemental Security Income (SSI)

Child support

Gifts

Loans

Veterans’ disability payments

Worker’s compensation

Is the $580 monthly amount based on my income or my household’s income?

The $580 monthly amount relates to your household income. If you are married to another adult who is also affected by work requirements for Medicaid coverage, NY State of Health has your combined income, which is considered your household income. The household income will determine if you both meet the requirements.

Work Types

What types of work count toward meeting the requirements?

Work may include:

A full-time job

Part-time job, including gig work (like Uber or DoorDash)

Self-employment, like owning your own business

Independent contractor work

Internships, paid or unpaid

Unpaid work

Work you do in exchange for housing, meals, goods, or services

What does working in exchange for goods or services mean?

This means you receive something other than a paycheck for your work. For example:

Fixing and maintaining an apartment building and getting free or reduced rent instead of a paycheck.

Working on a farm in exchange for housing or meals instead of or in addition to wages.

If this is the type of work you do, New York State will provide more information soon on how to demonstrate your employment.

What if I am a seasonal worker? How will my work count towards work requirements for Medicaid coverage?

If you are a seasonal worker, this means that your job only exists at certain times of the year and is tied to a season. Some examples of seasonal work include:

A farmhand hired for the picking season

A lifeguard at a summer pool

A ski instructor in the winter

A retail worker brought on only for the winter holidays

If you are a seasonal worker whose average monthly income over the prior 12 months is at least $580, then you may meet the requirements. To find out your average monthly income, add up all of your income over the last 12 months and divide it by 12.

Education Types

What type of school counts as an approved activity?

The following educational programs count as an approved activity:

College or university

Career and Technical Education (CTE) programs (like health science or culinary arts)

High school

GED programs

These programs can be online or in-person.

Do I have to go to school full-time?

No, you only need to go to school half-time. Your school or program will determine what half-time means.

What if I go to school less than half-time?

Some of your education hours may still count if your school considers you enrolled less than half-time. According to federal rules, each credit hour you take is equal to 13 hours of education per month. For example, if you take three credits, then you have 39 education hours that month (3 x 13 = 39).

Job Training or Work Program

What is a job training or work program?

A job training or work program is an organized program, often funded by the government, which helps you build skills for jobs, like learning a trade. You may gain hands-on experience through work placements. You can also get support for seeking a job or keeping a job. Some supervised job search or job-search training activities may count too.

What types of job training programs count?

Job training programs run or approved by New York State, the federal government, and some local county and city programs will count. In New York, the most common examples include:

Temporary Assistance (TA) and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) employment and training services

New York State Career Center programs

Veteran employment and training services through the Career Centers

Volunteering or Community Service

What counts as volunteering or community service?

Volunteering or community service may count when you do it with an organized public or nonprofit group. Activities that count include things like:

Volunteering at a food bank

Tutoring or mentoring

Delivering meals

Completing court-ordered community service

Helping clean up public parks

Activities that don’t count include things like:

Helping a friend move

Doing yard work for your neighbor

Attending your child’s school event

Joining a club

Campaigning or volunteering for a partisan political candidate or committee

Exceptions

Do I qualify for the current or former foster care youth exception?

You could qualify for an exception if you are a current foster care youth. You could also qualify for an exception if you are a former foster care youth, which means that:

You are under age 26;

You were in foster care in New York State, and you exited foster care between ages 18 and 21; and

You were enrolled in Medicaid when you exited foster care.

Do I qualify for the caregiver exception for a child under age 14 or disabled individual? Can more than one caregiver in my household qualify for an exception?

You could be considered a caregiver if you are:

The legal parent, including by adoption

The legal guardian, as chosen by a court, provides care. Financial-only guardianship doesn’t count.

A person related to or close to the child or disabled individual who provides regular care for them. (If you aren’t related to the child or disabled individual and you don’t live with them, you must provide at least 80 hours a month of care.)

More than one caregiver in your household may qualify if they fit one of the definitions above.

Do I qualify for the veterans with a total disability exception?

If you are a veteran, you could qualify in one of two ways. You either have:

A 100% disability rating, or

A total disability based on your individual unemployability (whether this is permanent or temporary).

Do I qualify for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) exception?

If you meet TANF work requirements, you qualify for an exception from work requirements for Medicaid coverage.

Do I qualify for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) exception?

If you have Medicaid and are in a SNAP household, then you qualify for an exception from meeting work requirements for Medicaid coverage if:

You are a member of a household that receives SNAP benefits; and

You are subject to at least one SNAP work requirement. This is either the general SNAP work requirement or the SNAP time-limited work requirement.

Do I qualify for the drug or alcohol treatment program exception?

You may qualify for an exception if you are actively participating in a drug addiction or alcohol treatment and rehabilitation program. This program must be run by a private nonprofit organization or institution, or by a public community mental health center.

If you have been diagnosed with substance use disorder but are not in active treatment, you might still qualify for an exception under a different category.

Do I qualify for an exception if I am pregnant or in the postpartum period?

If you are pregnant or were pregnant in the last 12 months, you qualify for an exception. This includes all birth outcomes, even non-live births. New York State will not require you to provide medical documentation to prove you are pregnant or postpartum.

Do I qualify for an exception based on a physical or mental health condition?

Several conditions could qualify you for an exception based on a physical or mental health condition that makes it difficult to work. New York State plans to provide details on which conditions qualify soon. The state is also still determining the best way to assess whether a physical or mental health condition makes it hard to meet the work requirements for Medicaid coverage.

What are the temporary exceptions to work requirements for Medicaid? How would I get one of these?

New York State will offer four temporary exceptions. You can find more information on these and if they might apply to you on the "Will there be temporary exceptions to the rule?” section on this page.

Income Verification and Documentation

How will New York State check my income?

New York State will first try to check your income using information from when you applied for or renewed your Medicaid. This may include details from federal and state tax records. It can also include information from Truv, an income verification tool that is used when you apply for or renew your Medicaid.

Will I need to show proof that I meet work requirements for Medicaid coverage or that I qualify for an exception?

New York State will first check your income. They will also look at approved activities and for any exceptions. They will use the information they already have to check if you meet the requirements or qualify for an exception. If the state doesn’t have the information it needs, NY State of Health might ask you for documents or to verify the information yourself. Details on required documentation will be available closer to January 1, 2027.

What happens if NY State of Health can’t confirm I meet the work requirements for Medicaid coverage?

If NY State of Health can’t confirm that you meet the work requirements, you will receive a notice asking for more information. This notice will:

Explain the work requirements for Medicaid coverage

Describe what information is needed from you

Provide a clear deadline to respond before any changes are made to your coverage

Let you know whether a temporary exception may apply.

Important note: Respond by the deadline in the notice to help protect your Medicaid coverage.

What happens if I don’t meet requirements or qualify for an exception?

If you need to meet the requirements and do not take action to do so, you could lose your Medicaid coverage. If you lose your Medicaid only because you don’t meet work requirements, you will not be eligible for Advance Premium Tax Credits (APTCs) used to purchase coverage through NY State of Health.

Medicaid Renewals

Starting on January 1, 2027, some adults ages 19–64 will need to renew their Medicaid every 6 months instead of once a year.

If you apply for Medicaid before January 1, 2027, or renew before March 1, 2027, you will get 12 months of coverage if you are eligible. After that, you will renew every 6 months.

If you apply for Medicaid after January 1, 2027, or renew after March 1, 2027, you will renew every 6 months if you still qualify.

Frequently Asked Questions about Medicaid Renewals

How often will I have to renew my Medicaid? When does that change?

Starting January 1, 2027, most adults aged 19-64 must renew their Medicaid every 6 months, instead of once a year. American Indian and Alaska Native adults are exempt from this change; they will renew once a year. Some other groups, like children and people with disabilities, will still renew their Medicaid once a year.

Here’s how the timing will work with the new rules:

If you apply for Medicaid before January 1, 2027, or renew before March 1, 2027, you will be eligible for 12 months of coverage. After that, you will have to renew every 6 months.

If you apply for Medicaid after January 1, 2027, or renew after March 1, 2027, you will have to renew every 6 months.

How does the Medicaid renewal process work?

NY State of Health will try to renew your coverage for you. Here is what will happen:

NY State of Health will first check the available information it has for you, like income, to see if you still qualify for Medicaid. You may not need to do anything.

If the state needs more information, it will reach out to you. You will get a notice asking you to log into your NY State of Health account and provide more information.

You will get a reminder before your Medicaid coverage ends. The state will send a warning at least 15 days before your coverage closes.

You have 90 days to get your coverage back. If your coverage ends, you can submit your information and get it reviewed within 90 days to see if you still qualify for coverage.

Remember: When you get a renewal notice, take the recommended action and respond right away. This will help the state move as quickly as possible to help you keep your Medicaid coverage. An enrollment assistor can help if you are not sure what to do. Find an enrollment assistor near you.

How do I find my Medicaid renewal date?

Log into your NY State of Health account at nystateofhealth.ny.gov. Click on the “Plans” tab at the top of the screen to find your Medicaid renewal date. You can also watch this "How To Find Your Enrollment End Date To Prepare For Renewal" video for more information.

Help with Past Medical Bills (Retroactive Coverage)

Right now, Medicaid can cover some medical bills from three months before you apply. This is called retroactive coverage. For example, if you apply for Medicaid in April 2026, the state might help pay bills from January, February, and March.

Starting on January 1, 2027, Medicaid will NOT cover past medical bills as far back. Here’s how the new rules will work:

If you are an adult aged 19-64: Medicaid can pay for 1 month of past medical bills.

For example, if you are in this group and apply for Medicaid in March 2027, the state might help pay bills from February.

All others: Medicaid can pay for 2 months of past medical bills.

For example, if you apply for Medicaid in March 2027, the state might help pay bills from January and February.

Important: Apply for Medicaid as soon as you think you qualify. If you wait until after a medical bill, Medicaid might not cover it.
