Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 02: Initial Request for Benefits

PM 02-04-00: Application

WAG 02-04-00

A completed application is required to receive cash, medical, or SNAP benefits. All applications must contain a name, address and signature to begin the application process. An application may be a paper form a person completes and signs, an application submitted electronically through the Application for Benefits Eligibility (ABE) system, or over the phone by calling the ABE Customer Call Center.

An applicant is a person who completes an application or has someone complete one for them. A person is not an applicant if they just ask questions about programs, benefits, or eligibility criteria.

A person must be allowed to complete an application. A person cannot be required to attend any meeting or orientation before they can sign an application.

The Family Community Resource Center application process includes:

making application forms available;

registering all applications that contain a name, address, and signature;

obtaining information and verifications to determine if an applicant is eligible for benefits;

giving the applicant a written notice of the decision; and

providing the applicant with the opportunity to register to vote (see PM 22-12-00).

Provide a Copy of the SNAP Application

The FCRC must offer a SNAP household a copy of their completed SNAP application. A copy of the completed application must be offered even if the request is for other program benefits that includes SNAP. The copy may be provided in paper, or electronic format, unless the household requests the copy in electronic format, in which case, an electronic copy must be provided.

Applications for Medical Benefits

There is no deadline on when a person may apply for Illinois Medicaid. For Illinois Medicaid programs, there is no open enrollment period and people can apply at any time just like they always have.

Consumers who have questions about the special enrollment period should call the Marketplace Call Center at 1-800-318-2596.

Application for Benefits Eligibility (ABE)

ABE is available via the internet 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. An application submitted through the ABE system requires an electronic signature. An application started in ABE that is saved so that it can be finished later is not an application.

ABE Customer Call Center

An application completed by calling the ABE Customer Call Center is an application if the customer agreed to the telephonic signature. If the applicant fails to complete the telephonic signature requirement or the call is dropped prior to completion, an application has not been filed.

After the interview has been completed, a recording is made of the household's verbal agreement which includes a summary of the information to which the household agreed.

Links

PM 02-04-01: Making Application Forms and Pamphlets Available

PM 02-04-02: Who May Apply

PM 02-04-03: Who Signs the Application

PM 02-04-04: When Is It an Application?

PM 02-04-05: Applications Received in the Wrong Office

PM 02-04-06: Application Date

PM 02-04-07: Transferring an Application (Cash,Medical)

PM 02-04-08: Helping the Applicant

PM 02-04-09 Handling Multiple Applications

PM 02-04-10 Medical Benefit Choice Preference

PM 02-04-11: Medical Application for Abandoned Newborns

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
