Health Insurance
Information, Counseling and
Assistance Program (HIICAP)
Guide for Counselors 2025

HIICAP Help Line:
1-800-701-0501

Website: https://aging.ny.gov/hiicap-counselors-corner

Health Insurance Information,
Counseling and Assistance
Program (HIICAP)
Guide for Counselors 2025

HIICAP Help Line: 1-800-701-0501

Website: https://aging.ny.gov/hiicap-counselors-corner

For HIICAP Counselors Only

Not for Public Distribution

1

Sample Medicare Health Insurance Card:

Social Security National Line: 1-800-772-1213
8:00 a.m. – 7:00 p.m., Monday – Friday
Social Security office locator:
https://secure.ssa.gov/ICON/main.jsp

2

HIICAP Introduction
In New York State, the SHIP program is referred to as the Health Insurance Information,
Counseling and Assistance Program (HIICAP).

HIICAP is comprised of New York State Office for the Aging (NYSOFA) HIICAP staff, a
network of 59 county-based HIICAPs, and six state-contracted Managed Care Consumer
Assistance Programs (MCCAPs) – the Medicare Rights Center, New York State Senior
Action Council, New York Legal Assistance Group, Legal Aid Society of New York, Empire
Justice Center, and Community Service Society.

Through this network, over 700 trained HIICAP counselors work directly with Medicare
beneficiaries to educate them about the Medicare program, Medigap policies, Medicaid,
Medicare Advantage Plans, Long-term Care Insurance, Low-Income Subsidy Programs,
employer-sponsored insurance, and other health insurance programs available in New York
State. The HIICAP mission is to empower, educate, and assist Medicare-eligible individuals
through objective outreach, counseling, and training. The HIICAP vision is to be the known
and trusted community resource for Medicare information. HIICAP counseling is local,
objective, confidential and knowledgeable, whether in-person or virtual.

The local HIICAP program coordinator manages the program, acting as a liaison to federal,
state, and local agencies. The coordinator provides consumer education and outreach, and
recruits, interviews, trains and supports HIICAP volunteer counselors.

Trained counselors, stationed either at their local area agency on aging or at another
community agency, educate and assist Medicare beneficiaries. Based on feedback from
local programs, NYSOFA HIICAP develops new educational materials, new methods of
problem resolution, and shares local and state trends to comply with federal reporting
requirements.

To obtain HIICAP services, Medicare beneficiaries can contact their local program or call the
New York State HIICAP line at 1-800-701-0501. Callers will be routed to their local HIICAP
program to speak with a trained counselor. HIICAP is federally funded program and receives
funding from the New York State Office for the Aging.

All material distributed by local HIICAP should include appropriate state, local and national
SHIP TA logos as well as the below statement:

The information provided by the Health Insurance Information, Counseling and Assistance
Program is intended for the sole purpose of educating consumers in regard to the choices
available for their health insurance needs. Particular emphasis is placed on understanding
original Medicare. Nothing herein is intended, nor should it be construed, as an
endorsement by the State of New York of any specific insurance product or insurer.

3

New Counselors, Volunteers and Coordinators
(Team members)
NYSOFA HIICAP provides annual training and certification to all counselors, coordinators,
and volunteers (team members).

The HIICAP coordinator in each county manages the program, acts as liaison to federal,
state, and local agencies, provides consumer education and outreach, and recruits,
interviews, trains and supports HIICAP volunteer counselors.

To be considered an active, properly screened, and trained coordinator, counselor, or
volunteer, you must have completed the program-specific required screenings and trainings.
This includes course work available in the SHIP TA Center, counselor shadowing,
certification by NY HIICAP through the annual exam, and having a signed agreement or
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the local program. Once training and
certification is complete HIICAP counselors can:

 Provide free, clear, accurate counseling and information.

 Educate consumers about Medicare benefits.

 Help consumers understand the Medicare prescription drug benefit.

 Help clients to determine whether they qualify for Low Income Subsidy Programs such
as the Medicare Savings Program.

NYSOFA Resources and Training Opportunities

 HIICAP Notebook: the HIICAP Notebook organizes Medicare information into
modules to help counselors better understand Medicare, Medigaps, Medicare
Advantage, Low Income Subsidy Programs, and more. The Notebook is only available
electronically and can be found on our NYSOFA HIICAP Corner at
https://aging.ny.gov/hiicap-notebook.

 The annual HIICAP coordinators conference held in September is for coordinators
only. This training offers important program updates and networking opportunities.

 Regional trainings are open to counselors and volunteers throughout the state. These
take place in the fall prior to the Annual Open Enrollment Period.

 Two spring trainings offered by the Medicare Rights Center are open to all
coordinators and counselors.

 New Coordinators training – held virtually as onboarding occurs throughout the year.

 HIICAP monthly coordinators calls – typically held the third Tuesday of each month;

4

information is sent out to coordinators prior to the monthly call.

 HIICAP email updates are used to share important Medicare and program
information. All new coordinators are added to our NYSOFA HIICAP listserv.

 HIICAP Counselor’s Corner is a dedicated site developed to provide counselors and
coordinators with online resources at https://aging.ny.gov/hiicap-counselors-corner.

 HIICAP counselors meet with their peers and their coordinator for ongoing education
and updates.

 HIICAP counselors complete an annual exam. The Annual HIICAP Counselor Exam
can be found online in the training and certification section of SHIP TA at
https://portal.shiptacenter.org/Login.aspx.

 HIICAP also has a webpage (https://aging.ny.gov/programs/medicare-and-health-
insurance) providing information to Medicare beneficiaries and counselors.

 CMS Publications such as the annual Medicare and You guide can be ordered
through CMS’s product ordering site. To create an account, go to
http://productordering.cms.hhs.gov/. CMS will not ship items to a P.O. Box.

Additional Resources

In addition to the above resources, New York HIICAP also offers the Medicare Rights Center
technical assistance and education resources, Medicare Interactive (at
http://www.medicareinteractive.org), Medicare Counselor and the Dear Marci newsletter, and
a dedicated HIICAP email for case assistance at HIICAP@medicarerights.org.

The Managed Care Consumer Assistance Programs are also available to assist counselors
and low-income beneficiaries with Part D appeals, exceptions, prior authorization requests
and other health insurance issues, and may provide free legal representation. Our state
MCCAP partners are below.

MCCAP – NAME Phone number Website/email
Community Service Society 212-254-8900 https://www.cssny.org/
Empire Justice Center 518-462-6831 https://empirejustice.org/
1-212-577-3300 (NYC area)
The Legal Aid Society https://legalaidnyc.org/
1-833-628-0087 (upstate)
1-800-333-4114 (consumer)
Medicare Rights Center https://www.medicarerights.org/
1-800-480-2060 (HIICAPs)
New York Legal Assistance
212-613-5000 https://nylag.org/
Group
Statewide Senior Action
1-800-333-4374 https://www.nysenior.org/
Council
5

SHIP Unique ID

A SHIP Unique ID allows trained HIICAP counselors to speak with a plan or CMS without the
beneficiary being present. Because SHIP Unique IDs are intended for resolving complex
beneficiary cases, they will not be needed by every team member. A SHIP Unique ID may be
approved by NYSOFA HIICAP for active, properly screened, and trained team members who
have completed the annual confidentiality agreement and have received annual privacy
training.

Requesting an ID

To request a SHIP Unique ID, a counselor must be registered in the Federal SHIP Tracking
and Reporting System (STARS), complete Medicare basic course work in SHIP TA,
complete the annual HIICAP exam, and shadow a more experienced counselor for additional
training. The counselor will need to have reported counseling activity into STARS prior to
approval.

NYSOFA HIICAP will review all requests for a SHIP Unique ID (this can take up to 7 days). If
the request is appropriate, it will be approved. The SHIP Unique ID will then be activated the
following month. Reporting is mandatory to maintain a SHIP Unique ID. 120 days of inactive
counseling activity will result in a revoked SHIP Unique ID.

Annual Recertification

All SHIP Unique ID confidentiality agreements and privacy training will need to be completed
annually. After completing privacy training, all those with a SHIP Unique ID will be required to
sign and date the updated confidentiality agreement and fax it to NYSOFA HIICAP for
approval. Annual SHIP Unique ID information is sent to local HIICAP program coordinators
through a NYSOFA issued program instruction (PI). HIICAP coordinators are responsible for
managing the annual SHIP Unique ID training and confidentiality agreements.

As a reminder, when onboarding new HIICAP/MIPPA counselors, the following steps need to
be followed:

 New HIICAP team members (coordinators, counselors, and volunteers) must
complete all required screening and training; this includes counselor shadowing, a
signed agreement or Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the local program,
completion of course work, and the annual HIICAP exam available in the SHIP TA
Center. New counselors can self-register as SHIP Counselors in the SHIP TA Center
website at https://portal.shiptacenter.org/Registration/Default.aspx.

 All coordinators, counselors, and volunteers will need to be registered in the federal
SHIP Tracking and Reporting System (STARS). To register new counselors and
volunteers in the STARS system, you will need to send a completed team member
profile form to our office via fax at (518) 486-2225 only.

 Please do not create new Team Members in STARS. The NYS State HIICAP Team
6

is responsible for team member creation in STARS. Please send requests for new
team members to Helen Fang. Once we receive the completed form, we will then
create the new team member profile in STARS. New users will then receive a
“Welcome to STARS” email with log-in information. This automatic email message
may land in the counselor’s spam folder, so please check these folders.

 If requesting a SHIP Unique ID for a new counselor conducting complex casework,
the counselor must be registered in the Federal SHIP Tracking and Reporting System
(STARS) and have completed all training outlined above. The signed (annual)
confidentiality agreement form must be sent to NY HIICAP via fax only. NY HIICAP
will review all requests (this can take up to 7 days). If the request is appropriate, it will
be approved. The CMS SHIP Unique ID will then be activated the following month.
Counselors with the CMS SHIP Unique ID are required to review and attest to the
NYS Privacy Training as part of the annual recertification process.

Reminder: Reporting of beneficiary contacts is mandatory to maintain a SHIP Unique ID.
After 120 days of inactive counseling, the SHIP Unique ID will automatically be revoked.

7

Table of Contents

Medicare Part A........................................................................................10

Medicare Part B........................................................................................12

Medicare Part C Advantage Plans............................................................17

Medicare Part D Prescription Coverage....................................................19

Medicare Enrollment Periods....................................................................23

Medicare Rules and Resources................................................................24

Medigap Medicare Supplemental Plans...................................................30

EPIC.........................................................................................................33

Low Income Subsidy Program/Extra Help................................................37

Medicare Savings Program......................................................................40

Medicaid: Medicaid and Medicare Beneficiaries.......................................45

MLTC........................................................................................................57

Medicare Marketing Rules........................................................................59

Medicare Complaints................................................................................62

Plan Finder...............................................................................................66

HIICAP Reporting.....................................................................................68

Uninsured.................................................................................................74

9

Medicare - Part A
Hospital Coverage
Hospital Benefit Period

A benefit period is the way that Original Medicare measures use of hospital and skilled
nursing facility (SNF) services. A benefit period begins the day a person enters a hospital or
SNF and ends when they have not received hospital or Medicare-covered skilled care in a
SNF for 60 days in a row.

Deductible per benefit period: $1,676 (Paid upon admission in a hospital)

Day 1-60 $0 coinsurance for each benefit period

Days 61-90 $419 coinsurance per day for each benefit period

91 & $838 coinsurance per each “lifetime reserve day” after day 90 for
Days
beyond each benefit period (up to 60 days over a beneficiary’s lifetime)

Days Beyond All costs beyond lifetime reserve days

Skilled Nursing Facility

Day 1-20 $0 for each benefit period

Days 21-100 $209.50 coinsurance per day of each benefit period

Days 101 & beyond All costs for each day

If a beneficiary stops getting skilled care in the SNF, or leaves the SNF altogether, their SNF
coverage may be affected depending on how long their break in SNF care lasts.

If a beneficiary’s break in skilled care lasts more than 30 days, they will need a new 3-day
hospital stay to qualify for additional SNF care. The new hospital stay doesn’t need to be for
the same condition that the beneficiary was treated for during their previous stay.

If a beneficiary’s break in skilled care lasts for at least 60 days in a row, this ends their
current benefit period and renews their SNF benefits. This means that the maximum
coverage available would be up to 100 days of SNF benefits.

Eligibility: Age 65 and Older

 A beneficiary or their spouse (or former spouse) had at least 10 years (or 40 calendar
quarters) of employment in which they paid Social Security taxes.

10

 Would be entitled to Social Security benefits based on the beneficiary’s spouse’s (or
divorced spouse’s) work record, and that spouse is at least 62 (a beneficiary’s spouse
does not have to apply for benefits to be eligible based on the beneficiary’s spouse’s
work).

 Receive Social Security or railroad retirement benefits.

 Are not getting Social Security or railroad retirement benefits, but the beneficiary
worked long enough to be eligible for benefit.

 Worked long enough in a federal, state, or local government job to be insured for
Medicare.

Eligibility Under Age 65

 Receive Social Security disability benefits and have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou
Gehrig’s) disease; or

 Have been a Social Security disability beneficiary for 24 months; or

 Diagnosed with End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) and receiving dialysis treatments or
had a kidney transplant; or

 Worked long enough in a federal, state, or local government job and the beneficiary
meets the requirement of the Social Security disability program.

Enrollment

 For those already receiving Social Security benefits (including Railroad or disability),
enrollment is automatic and would be effective the first of the month in which they turn
65.

 Enroll through Social Security at 1-800-772-1213 or online at http://www.ssa.gov.

Premium (2025)

40 or more working quarters $0
30-39 working quarters $285.00/month

Less than 30 working quarters $518.00/month

11

Medicare - Part B
Outpatient Services
Part B helps cover services from doctors and other health care providers, outpatient care,
home health care, durable medical equipment (like wheelchairs, walkers, hospital beds, and
other equipment), and many preventive services (like screenings, shots, or vaccines, and
yearly “wellness” visits).

The standard Part B premium amount in 2025 is $185.00 (or higher depending on the
beneficiary’s income). However, some people who get Social Security benefits pay less than
this amount. A beneficiary will pay the standard premium amount (or higher) if:

 The beneficiary enrolls in Part B for the first time in 2025.

 The beneficiary does not receive Social Security benefits.

 The beneficiary is directly billed for their Part B premiums (meaning they aren't taken
out of the beneficiary’s Social Security benefits).

 The beneficiary has Medicare and Medicaid, and Medicaid pays the premiums (the
beneficiary’s state will pay the standard premium amount).

 The beneficiary’s modified adjusted gross income, as reported on their IRS tax return
from two years ago, is above a certain amount. If so, the beneficiary will pay the
standard premium amount and an Income Related Monthly Adjustment Amount
(IRMAA). IRMAA is an extra charge added to a beneficiary’s premium.

If the beneficiary is in 1 of the 5 groups mentioned above, the following chart outlines what
they will pay in 2025.

2023 Beneficiary 2023 Beneficiary 2023 Beneficiary Monthly
Income Income Income Premium
(individual tax return) (joint tax return) (Married, separate tax return) 2025

$106,000 or less $212,000 or less $106,000 or less $185.00

$106,001+ up to $212,001+ up to
Not applicable $259.00
$133,000 $266,000

$133,001+ up to $266,001+ up to
Not applicable $370.00
$167,000 $334,000

$167,001+ up to $334,001+ up to
Not applicable $480.90
$200,000 $400,000

12

$200,001+ but less $400,001+ but less $106,001+ but less than
$591.90
than $500,000 than $750,000 $394,000

$500,000 or above $750,000 or above $394,000 and above $628.90

Cost for services

 Coinsurance: Usually, 20% of the cost for each Medicare-covered service or item
after the deductible has been paid (and the doctor or health care provider accepts
the Medicare-approved amount as full payment – called “accepting assignment”).

 Annual deductible: $257.00 before Original Medicare starts to pay. A beneficiary
pays this deductible once each year.

 The eligibility rules for Part B depend on whether a person is eligible for premium-free
Part A or whether the individual must pay a premium for Part A coverage.

Eligibility for Part B

Individuals who are eligible for premium-free Part A are also eligible to enroll in Part B once
they are entitled to Part A. Enrollment in Part B can only happen at certain times.

Individuals who must pay a premium for Part A must meet the following requirements to
enroll in Part B:

 Be age 65 or older.

 Be a U.S. resident.

 Be either a U.S. citizen OR an alien who has been lawfully admitted for permanent
residence and has been residing in the United States for 5 continuous years prior to
the month of filing an application for Medicare.

If a beneficiary is under the age of 65, they must meet the same criteria noted above (for
persons aged 65 and up) and are receiving Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) for
more than 24 months, or are diagnosed with End-Stage Renal Disease, or Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). If a person does not purchase Part B when first eligible, they may
face a penalty.

A beneficiary can enroll in Part B through Social Security at 1-800-772-1213 or online at
http://www.ssa.gov.

Part B Enrollment Periods

 General Enrollment Period: January 1 to March 31 of each year. Coverage will begin

13

the first of the following month of enrollment.

 Initial Enrollment Period: A person has 7 months surrounding their 65th birthday to
join Part B (3 months prior to the month of birthday, and 3 months after).

When to enroll in Part A and/or Part B Coverage starts

The first day of the month of the
3 months before a beneficiary turns 65
beneficiary’s 65th birthday

The month a beneficiary turns 65 1 month after the beneficiary signs up

The first of the following month of
1 month after a beneficiary turns 65
enrollment

The first of the following month of
2 months after a beneficiary turns 65
enrollment

The first of the following month of
3 months after a beneficiary turns 65
enrollment

During the General Enrollment Period The first of the following month of
(January 1 – March 31) enrollment

Special Enrollment Period (SEP)

Individuals may enroll during the SEP if they do not enroll in Part B or premium Part A when
first eligible because they were covered under a group health plan based on their own or a
spouse's current employment (or the current employment of a family member, if disabled).
The individual can enroll at any time while covered under the group health plan based on
current employment, or during the 8-month period that begins the month the employment
ends, or the group health plan coverage ends, whichever comes first.

Late Enrollment Penalty

The Late Enrollment Penalty will go up 10 percent for each full 12-month period that a person
could have had Part B but didn’t sign up for it. A beneficiary can remove the Late Enrollment
Penalty if they are eligible for a Medicare Savings Program (MSP). If a beneficiary is under
age 65 and receiving Medicare Part B with penalty, the Late Enrollment Penalty is waived
(removed) at the time of their 65th birthday. Equitable Relief can be used for enrollment or to
appeal a Late Enrollment Penalty.

14

Equitable Relief

Equitable relief is an administrative process that allows a beneficiary to request the following
from the Social Security Administration (SSA):

 Immediate or retroactive Medicare enrollment
 Elimination of the Medicare Part B late enrollment penalty (LEP)

To request equitable relief, the beneficiary must have failed to enroll in Medicare due to the
error, misrepresentation, or inaction of a federal employee, such as a Social Security or
1-800-MEDICARE representative. Equitable relief does not apply if the beneficiary was
misinformed about their Medicare rights and options by others, such as an employer.

Example: A beneficiary did not enroll in Part B because a Social Security representative said
that they did not need to sign up. Because the beneficiary failed to enroll due to an error
caused by misinformation from a federal employee, the beneficiary may have grounds for
receiving equitable relief.

Requesting Equitable Relief

To request equitable relief, the beneficiary or their representative should write a letter to their
local Social Security office explaining that they received misinformation that caused them to
delay enrollment. Local offices can be found by calling 800-772-1213 or visiting
www.ssa.gov/locator.

The person writing the letter (beneficiary or representative) should be as specific as possible
and include the name of the representative who provided the wrong information, date and
time of the conversation, outcome of the conversation, and any additional notes.

The letter should indicate whether the beneficiary is requesting coverage going forward,
retroactive coverage, and/or elimination of Part B LEP. Keep in mind that if retroactive
coverage is requested, the beneficiary will have to pay premiums back to the date the
coverage begins.

The beneficiary or representative should follow up with the request approximately one month
after the request is submitted. The beneficiary may also want to contact a legislative
representative, such as a member of Congress, and ask them to follow up on the case.

Social Security is not required to respond to equitable relief requests within any set
timeframe. They are also not obligated to send the beneficiary a formal decision letter in
response to the request.

If a beneficiary is denied equitable relief, there is no formal appeal process, but the
beneficiary can resubmit the request with more or different information as many times as
they wish.

15

Sample Equitable relief letter (for illustrative purposes). Find a downloadable version at:
https://www.medicarerights.org/fliers/Part-B-Enrollment/Equitable-Relief.pdf?nrd=1

16

Medicare - Part C
Medicare Advantage Plans
A Medicare Advantage Plan, sometimes referred to as Part C, is a type of Medicare health
plan offered by a private company that contracts with Medicare to provide Part A and Part B
benefits. Many Advantage plans include Part D prescription coverage. In addition to the
Medicare monthly Part B premium responsibility, some plans may charge an extra monthly
premium. A beneficiary must have Medicare Part A and Part B and live in the health plan’s
service area. A beneficiary will still have the same Medicare rights and protections.

Types of Medicare Advantage Plans

Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) – In HMO Plans, a beneficiary generally must get
their care and services from doctors, other health care providers, or hospitals in the plan's
network, with the following exceptions: emergency care, out-of-area urgent care, and out-of-
area dialysis. In some plans, a beneficiary may be able to go out-of-network for certain
services, but it usually costs less if care is received from a network provider. This is called an
HMO with a point-of-service (POS) option. The plan may require members to get referrals
from a primary care physician to see a specialist in their network.

Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) – A Medicare PPO Plan is a type of Medicare
Advantage Plan offered by a private insurance company. In a PPO Plan, the beneficiary
pays less if they use doctors, hospitals, and other health care providers who belong to the
plan's network. The beneficiary will pay more if they use doctors, hospitals, and providers
outside of the network. A member does not have to get a referral to see a specialist.

Private Fee for Service (PFFS) – A Medicare PFFS is offered by a private insurance
company. PFFS plans aren’t the same as Original Medicare or Medigap. The plan
determines how much it will pay doctors, other health care providers, and hospitals, and how
much the beneficiary must pay when they get care. Under a PFFS plan, a beneficiary may
go to any Medicare-approved medical provider or hospital that accepts the plan’s payment
terms. PFFS plans also have networks of providers; no referrals are necessary. Some PFFS
plans offer Part D coverage, and some plans do not. If the PFFS plan does not offer Part D
coverage, the beneficiary can enroll in a stand-alone Part D plan.

Special Needs Plans (SNPs) – A Medicare SNP is a type of Medicare Advantage plan that
is only available for certain Medicare beneficiaries such as those with both Medicare and
Medicaid, institutionalized beneficiaries, or those with certain chronic conditions. Special
Needs Plans may offer more focused and specialized health care as well as better
coordination of care. All SNPs include Part D drug coverage. Some SNPs for people with
Medicare and Medicaid are also available to beneficiaries with QMB who do not also have
Medicaid.

17

Medical Savings Account (MSA) – Medicare MSA plans combine a high deductible
Medicare Advantage plan with a medical savings account. The plan deposits an amount
annually into an account which can be used for medical expenses. Any unused portion can
be carried over to the next year. Once the high deductible is met, the plan pays 100% of
covered expenses. Preventive services may not be subject to the deductible and
coinsurance. MSA plans do not have a provider network. MSA plan members can use any
Medicare provider.

18

Medicare - Part D
Prescription Coverage
The Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit is the part of Medicare that covers
most outpatient prescription drugs. Part D is offered through private companies either as a
stand-alone plan, for those enrolled in Original Medicare, or as a set of benefits included with
a Medicare Advantage Plan. A beneficiary must be enrolled in Medicare Part A and/or B to
enroll in Medicare Part D.

Medicare offers prescription drug coverage to everyone with Medicare. If a beneficiary
decides not to get Medicare drug coverage when first eligible, they will likely pay a late
enrollment penalty unless they have other creditable prescription drug coverage or they
receive Extra Help. To get Medicare drug coverage, a beneficiary must join a plan run by an
insurance company or other private company approved by Medicare. Each plan can vary in
cost and drugs covered. There are two ways a beneficiary can obtain Medicare drug
coverage: through a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan (Part D) or a Medicare Advantage Plan
(Part C) (like an HMO or PPO).

Deductible

Until a beneficiary meets their Part D deductible (up to $590 in 2025), they will pay the full
negotiated price for their covered prescription drugs. Once a beneficiary meets the
deductible, the plan will begin to cover the cost of the drugs.

Initial Coverage Period

After a beneficiary meets their deductible, the plan will help pay for their covered prescription
drugs. The plan will pay some of the cost, and the beneficiary will pay a copayment or
coinsurance. In 2025, the initial coverage stage ends once their out-of-pocket spending on
covered Part D drugs reaches $2,000 (including certain payments made on their behalf, i.e.
Extra Help). At this point, the beneficiary will automatically receive catastrophic coverage

Catastrophic Coverage Period

A beneficiary enters catastrophic coverage after they reach $2,000 in out-of-pocket costs for
covered drugs. In 2025, once a beneficiary has reached the catastrophic coverage stage,
they won’t have to pay any out-of-pocket costs for covered Part D drugs for the rest of the
calendar year. Please see the Medicare Part D Cost Sharing Chart on the following page.

Medicare Prescription Payment Plan

The Medicare Prescription Payment Plan is a payment option that works with a beneficiary’s
current drug coverage to help them manage their out-of-pocket costs for drugs that are
covered by their plan. The payment plan assists beneficiaries by spreading costs across the
calendar year (January-December). A beneficiary that has a stand-alone Part D plan or a
Medicare Advantage Plan with drug coverage may utilize this payment option. The payment
plan is offered by all plans. Participation is voluntary and there is no additional cost.

19

Late Enrollment Penalty

Generally, a beneficiary has 63 days to enroll into a Part D Plan after losing creditable drug
coverage through no fault of their own. The premium penalty will be one percent of the
national premium for every month that the beneficiary delays enrollment. The average
national premium in 2025 is $36.78 a month. For example, if a beneficiary delayed
enrollment for five months, their monthly penalty would be $1.90 ($36.78 X 1% = $0.37;
$0.37 X 5 months = $1.85; $1.85 (rounded up to nearest $0.10) = $1.90). This penalty will be
added to the person’s plan premium.

LEP Reconsideration (Appeal) Process

An enrollee may use the “Part D LEP Reconsideration Request Form C2C” to request an
appeal of a Late Enrollment Penalty decision. The enrollee must complete the form, sign it,
and send it to the Independent Review Entity (IRE) as instructed in the form. The Part D
Appeal Reconsideration Form can be found at: https://www.cms.gov/files/document/part-d-
lep-reconsideration-request-form-c2c.pdf.

The LEP reconsideration is conducted by an IRE under contract with Medicare. The IRE
generally will notify the enrollee of the final LEP reconsideration decision (including a
decision to dismiss the reconsideration request) within 90 calendar days of receiving a
request for reconsideration.

Limited Income Newly Eligible Transition Program (LINET)

LINET provides immediate prescription coverage for Medicare beneficiaries who qualify for
Medicaid or Extra Help and have no prescription drug coverage. Enrollment in LINET is
temporary, usually for 1 to 2 months. This temporary coverage provides time for the
20

beneficiary to choose a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan. If a Part D plan is not
selected, Medicare will automatically enroll the individual into a benchmark plan.

If the individual is eligible for LINET, ask the pharmacist to submit a claim to LINET using the
following:

 BIN = 015599
 PCN = 005440000
 Group ID = may be left blank
 Cardholder ID = Beneficiary Medicare Health Insurance Claim Number (HICN)
including letter
 Patient ID = Medicaid ID or Social Security Number
 The Limited Income NET Program Payer sheet, which can be found at
https://www.humana.com/LINET

For claims that are paid out-of-pocket, beneficiaries should submit receipts to:

Medicare Limited Income NET Program
PO Box 14310
Lexington, KY 40512-4310

If a beneficiary has additional questions, they can contact the LINET help desk at 800-783-
1307. For problems at the pharmacy with Medicaid billing, contact eMedNY at 1-800-343-
9000.

Transition Policy

A transition refill, also known as a transition fill, is a one-time, 30-day supply of a Medicare-
covered drug that Medicare Part D plans must cover. Transition fills are:

 Temporary
 Not for new prescriptions
 Filled up to 90 days after joining a plan

The beneficiary should use the one-time transition fill period to work with their doctor to
decide whether it’s ok to switch to another drug the plan covers with no limitations, or to
request a formulary exception.

Prescription Appeals Process

If a plan denied a request to override a restriction or move the drug to a lower cost tier
(requested an “exception”), the beneficiary can file an appeal. The exception needs to be
officially denied in writing. Notice from the pharmacy is not an official denial. The process for
appealing is the same whether the beneficiary is working with an Advantage Plan or stand-
alone private drug plan. A person has 60 days from the date on the "Notice of Denial" to
submit an appeal. An appeal process chart is located on the following page.

21

Part D Appeal Process Chart (for illustrative purposes).
Find a downloadable version at: https://www.cms.gov/medicare/appeals-and-
grievances/medprescriptdrugapplgriev/downloads/flowchart-medicare-part-d.pdf

22

Medicare
Enrollment Periods
Annual Election Period (AEP)

 October 15 to December 7
 A person can drop, pick-up or switch any health plan options.
 Changes are effective January 1 of the following year.

General Enrollment Period (GEP)

 January 1 to March 31
 For individuals who missed their Medicare Part B IEP.
 Coverage effective date will be the first of the following month of enrollment.

5 Star Special Enrollment Period

 December 8 until November 30 of the following year (i.e. 12/8/24 - 11/30/25)
 A one-time SEP during the above dates
 People can switch to a 5-Star Medicare Advantage plan (with or without drugs), or a
5-Star Medicare Prescription Drug plan at any time during the year.
 People currently enrolled in a plan with a 5-Star overall rating may also switch to a
different plan with a 5-Star overall rating.
 People with Original Medicare, with or without Part D, may also use this SEP to pick
up a 5 Star Presctiption Drug Plan or 5 Star Medicare Advantage for the first time.
 Enrollment is effective the first day of the following month.

Initial Enrollment Period (IEP)

 For individuals upon first meeting the eligibility requirements for Medicare.
 An eligible person has seven months to enroll into Medicare. The IEP begins three
months before the person meets the eligibility requirements and ends three months
following that month.

Medicare Advantage Open Enrollment Period (MA OEP)

 January 1 to March 31
 Beneficiaries on a Medicare Advantage Plan (with or without Part D) can switch to
either another Medicare Advantage Plan or to Original Medicare.
 Effective the 1st of the following month.

Special Enrollment Periods

Due to CMS amending rules for some special enrollment periods, please refer to the Special
Enrollment Chart developed by the Medicare Rights Center to view the special enrollment
periods available. The chart is at https://www.medicareinteractive.org/pdf/SEP-Chart.pdf.
23

Medicare
Rules and Resources
Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs)

ACOs are a group of doctors, hospitals, and other health care providers who come together
voluntarily to give coordinated high-quality care to their Medicare patients. The goal of
coordinated care is to ensure that patients, especially the chronically ill, get the right care at
the right time, while avoiding unnecessary duplication of services and preventing medical
errors. ACOs are not managed care.

Ambulance Coverage

Beneficiaries can get emergency ambulance transportation when they experience a sudden
medical emergency, and their health is in danger because they can’t be safely transported by
others by car or taxi. The ambulance provider must accept Medicare assignment and bill
Medicare directly, meaning they must accept the Medicare-approved amount. Medicare will
pay for 80% of the approved amount, and the beneficiary will be responsible for 20% co-
insurance. Some Medicare Advantage Plans may offer additional transportation services.

Non-emergency ambulance coverage is limited. Beneficiaries may be able to get non-
emergency ambulance transportation when they have a written order from their doctor
saying that ambulance transportation is medically necessary. Medicare will never pay for
ambulette services.

Limiting Charge-Balance Billing

In New York State, limits apply to the amount a physician may charge a Medicare
beneficiary. The limit is 105% of the amount approved by Medicare. For these services, the
federal limit of 115% of the Medicare approved amount applies. The beneficiary is still
required to pay the Medicare deductible and co-insurance. The law applies to more
specialized services and treatments provided in a doctor’s office or clinic, to all physician
treatments, and services provided on an inpatient basis in the hospital. It does not apply to
participating doctors who accept Medicare assignment in all cases. In New York State, QMB-
eligible enrollees are not responsible for any Medicare Part B Cost-Sharing.

Benefits Coordination and Recovery Center

The Benefits Coordination and Recovery Center (1-855-798-2627) can assist with Medicare
coverage status, auto no-fault, workman’s compensation, liability, or a change in insurance
coverage or employment status. They can review and update a person’s billing information.
In some cases, supporting documentation may need to be supplied.

If a beneficiary has Medicare and other health insurance or coverage, each type of coverage
is called a "payer." When there's more than one payer, "coordination of benefits" rules decide
which one pays first. The "primary payer" pays what it owes on the beneficiary’s bills first and
then sends the rest to the "secondary payer" to pay. In some cases, there may also be a
24

third payer.

Durable Medical Equipment (DME)

Round 2021 of the DMEPOS (Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics, and
Supplies) Competitive Bidding Program (CBP) began on January 1, 2021, and expired on
December 31, 2023.

Since January 1, 2024, there has been a temporary gap period for DMEPOS CBP.

During the temporary gap period, Medicare-enrolled DMEPOS suppliers may furnish
DMEPOS items and services to patients. Here are the payment rules:

 Adjusted fees in former competitive bidding areas (CBAs) are based on 100% of the
single payment amount for the CBA increased by the projected percentage change in
the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) from January 2023 to
January 2024.

 Adjusted fees in non-CBAs are based on fully adjusted rates per the applicable
methodology under https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-42/chapter-IV/subchapter-B/part-
414/subpart-D/section-414.210.

Please see the CMS announcement for additional information. CMS is required by law to
recompete contracts under the DMEPOS Competitive Bidding Program at least once every
three years. More information is at https://www.medicare.gov/sites/default/files/2022-
02/11461-DMEPOS-Competitive-Bidding-Program-Guide.pdf. To find a Medicare approved
supplier in a specific area, check with the plan and/or go to
https://www.medicare.gov/medical-equipment-suppliers/.

Foreign Travel

Medicare does not cover medical care outside of the country. If a beneficiary will be traveling
to a foreign country and would like insurance, they should talk to their travel agent about
special travel insurance. The only exceptions in which Medicare may cover medical care
outside of the U.S. are outlined below.

 Medicare will pay for emergency services in Canada if a beneficiary is traveling a
direct route between Alaska and another state.

 Medicare will pay for medical care provided to a beneficiary on a cruise ship if the
beneficiary gets care while the ship is in U.S. territorial waters. This means the ship is
in a U.S. port or within six hours of arrival at or departure from a U.S. port.

 Medicare may pay for non-emergency inpatient services in a foreign hospital (and
connected physician and ambulance costs). It is covered if it is closer to a
beneficiary’s residence than the nearest U.S. hospital that is available and equipped
to treat their medical condition. This may happen if, for example, a beneficiary lives
near the border of Mexico or Canada.
25

 Medigap coverage exists outside the U.S in some circumstances. If a beneficiary has
Medigap Plan C, D, F, G, M or N, the plan covers foreign travel emergency care if it
begins during the first 60 days of the beneficiary’s trip, and if Medicare doesn't
otherwise cover the care. The plan pays 80% of the billed charges for certain
medically necessary emergency care outside the U.S. after the beneficiary meets a
$250 deductible for the year. Foreign travel emergency coverage with Medigap
policies has a lifetime limit of $50,000.

If a person wishes to reside outside of the U.S., Medicare will not cover any health services.
The person may want to consider keeping Part B in case they plan to return to the United
States. This will eliminate the need to wait until the next Part B General Enrollment Period
(GEP) to enroll and will help avoid any penalties.

Home Health Care

Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) and/or Medicare Part B (Medical Insurance) covers
eligible home health services, including:

 Intermittent skilled nursing care

 Physical therapy

 Speech-language pathology services

 Continued occupational services

A beneficiary is typically referred for home care services by a physician. A Medicare
participating home health care agency (HHA) will then perform an assessment to see if the
beneficiary meets the Medicare criteria for coverage. The agency will draft a “plan of care.”
The plan of care will need to be approved and certified by a doctor. Medicare-approved
home health agencies can be found at http://www.medicare.gov/homehealthcompare/ and a
CMS published booklet on Medicare and Home Health Care can be found at
https://www.medicare.gov/pubs/pdf/10969-Medicare-and-Home-Health-Care.pdf.

Home Health Aide Services

Medicare will pay for part-time or intermittent home health aide services (like personal care),
if necessary, to maintain health or treat an illness. Medicare does not cover home health aide
services unless an individual is also receiving skilled care. Skilled care includes skilled
nursing care (other than drawing blood), physical therapy, speech-language pathology
services, and continuing occupational therapy. If a person does not qualify to have a
Medicare-approved aide, other programs may cover this expense, such as Medicaid and the
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).

Hospice

Hospice care is a program of care and support for people who are terminally ill. A beneficiary
26

can get Medicare hospice benefits when they meet all the following conditions:

 The beneficiary is eligible for Medicare Part A (hospital insurance).

 The beneficiary’s doctor and the hospice medical director certify that the beneficiary is
terminally ill (with a life expectancy of 6 months or less).

 The beneficiary signs a statement choosing hospice care instead of other Medicare-
covered benefits to treat their terminal illness.

 The beneficiary gets care from a Medicare-approved hospice program.

The doctor and the hospice medical team will work with the beneficiary and family to
establish a plan of care that meets the needs of the beneficiary. When a person chooses
hospice care, Medicare will not pay for treatment intended to cure the terminal illness or
prescription drugs to cure the terminal illness. To find a hospice program in New York, call
1-800-Medicare or visit www.medicare.gov. You can also refer to CMS’s publication on
hospice at https://www.medicare.gov/pubs/pdf/02154-Medicare-Hospice-Benefits.pdf.

Mental Health

Medicare Part A covers inpatient mental health services that a beneficiary receives in either
a psychiatric hospital (a hospital that only treats mental health patients) or a general hospital.
Be aware that a beneficiary will have the same out-of-pocket costs regardless of whether
they receive care in a general or psychiatric hospital. After meeting the Part A deductible,
Original Medicare pays in full for the first 60 days of the benefit period. After day 60, the
beneficiary will pay a daily hospital coinsurance.

Medicare Part B covers outpatient mental health care, including the following services:

 Individual and group therapy

 Substance abuse treatment

 Tests to make sure that the beneficiary is getting the right care

 Occupational therapy

 Activity therapies, such as art, dance, or music therapy

 Training and education (such as training on how to inject a needed medication or
education about the beneficiary’s condition)

 Family counseling (if the purpose is to help with a beneficiary’s treatment)

 Laboratory/diagnostic tests

27

 Prescription drugs that a beneficiary cannot administer themself, such as injections
that a doctor must give them

 Medication management

 Partial hospitalization

 An annual depression screening

Non-Covered Medicare Services

 Alternative medicine, including experimental procedures and treatments, acupuncture,
and chiropractic services (other than manual subluxation of the spine).

 Most care received outside of the United States.

 Cosmetic surgery (unless it is needed to improve the function of a malformed part of
the body).

 Most dental care.

 Hearing aids or the examinations for prescribing or fitting hearing aids (except for
implants to treat severe hearing loss in some cases).

 Personal care or custodial care, such as help with bathing, toileting, and dressing
(unless homebound and receiving skilled care) and nursing home care (except in a
SNF, if eligible).

 Housekeeping services to help a beneficiary stay in their home, such as shopping,
meal preparation, and cleaning (unless the beneficiary is receiving hospice care).

 Non-medical services, including hospital television and telephone, a private hospital
room, canceled or missed appointments, and copies of x-rays.

 Most non-emergency transportation, including ambulette services.

 Transportation, except for medically necessary ambulance services.

 Most vision (eye) care, including eyeglasses (except when following cataract surgery)
and examinations for prescribing or fitting eyeglasses.

28

Filing Direct Medical Payment Claims to Medicare – 1490s

To obtain Medicare payment or receive a Medicare denial notice, beneficiaries need to send
their original bill along with any other proper documentation (ask the doctor to code the bill
and list the medical condition) to:

National Government Services, Inc.
PO Box 6178
Indianapolis, IN 46206-6178

A copy of the 1490s form can be found at
http://www.cms.gov/cmsforms/downloads/cms1490s-english.pdf

Medicare claims must be filed no later than 12 months (or one full calendar year) after the
date when the services were provided.

Medicare Therapy Limits

Medicare Part B (Medical Insurance) helps pay for medically necessary outpatient physical
or occupational therapy, as well as speech-language pathology services. The therapy limits –
$2,410 combined for physical therapy (PT) and speech-language pathology (SLP) and
$2,410 for occupational therapy (OT) – apply to outpatient therapy received at therapists' or
physicians' offices, an outpatient hospital, and home, when not part of a Medicare-covered
home health benefit.

Once a beneficiary reaches therapy limits, their therapist will need to add a special code to
the beneficiary’s therapy claim. By adding this code, the therapist confirms that the
beneficiary’s therapy services are reasonable and necessary. The beneficiary will be
responsible to pay 20% of the Medicare-approved amount, and the Part B deductible
applies.

To keep up to date on these limitation amounts, visit the U.S. Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services website at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Billing/TherapyServices.

29

Medigap
Medicare Supplemental Plans
Original Medicare pays for much, but not all, of the cost for covered health care services and
supplies. Medigap is a Medicare Supplement Insurance plan that helps pay some of the
remaining health care costs, such as copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles. Medigap
plans are sold by private insurance companies. To be eligible for a Medigap, a beneficiary
must be enrolled in both Part A and Part B. Remember, Medigap insurance will only pay after
Original Medicare pays first. If a beneficiary has a Medicare Advantage Plan, they cannot buy
a Medigap.

New York State law and regulations require that any insurer writing Medigap insurance must
accept a Medicare enrollee’s application for coverage at any time throughout the year.
Insurers may not deny the applicant a Medigap policy or make any premium rate distinctions
because of health status, claims experience, medical condition or whether the applicant is
receiving health care services.

Medigap Waiting Periods in New York State

Medigap policies may contain up to a six-month waiting period before the pre-existing
condition is covered. A pre-existing condition is a condition for which medical advice was
given or treatment was recommended or received from a physician within six months before
the effective date of coverage. However, under New York State regulation, the waiting period
may either be reduced or waived entirely, depending upon a beneficiary’s individual
circumstances.

Medigap insurers are required to reduce the waiting period by the number of days that the
beneficiary was covered under some form of “creditable” coverage as long as there were no
breaks in coverage of more than 63 calendar days. The following types of coverage are
considered “creditable”:

 A group health plan
 Health insurance coverage
 Medicare*
 Medicaid
 CHAMPUS and TRICARE health care programs for the uniformed military services
 A medical care program of the Indian Health Services or tribal organization
 A state health benefits risk pool
 A health benefit plan issued under Peace Corps Act, and
 Medicare supplement insurance, Medicare select coverage or Medicare Advantage

*Credit for the time that a person was previously covered under Medicare shall be required
only if the applicant submits an application for Medigap insurance prior to or during the six-
month period beginning with the first day of the first month in which an individual is both 65
years of age or older and is enrolled for benefits under Medicare Part B.

30

The pre-existing condition waiting period may be reduced by one month for each month a
beneficiary was enrolled in creditable coverage prior to purchasing a Medigap. If they had
creditable coverage for two months before purchasing a Medigap, their policy may only
impose a four-month waiting period, instead of six months. If a beneficiary had six or more
months of prior creditable coverage, Medigap insurers must cover their prior medical
conditions immediately. Keep in mind that you cannot use creditable coverage to reduce
your pre-existing waiting period if you had a break in coverage of more than 63 days.

For a list of Medigap plans in New York State, please visit:
https://www.dfs.ny.gov/consumers/health_insurance/supplement_plans_rates

For questions about Medigap policies, beneficiaries can contact the New York State
Department of Financial Services at:

1-800-342-3736 (M-F 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.)
518-474-6600 (Albany)
212-480-6400 (New York City)
consumers@dfs.ny.gov

Dis-enrolling from a Medigap plan

A Medigap policy cannot be used to pay a beneficiary’s Medicare Advantage Plan
copayments, deductibles, and premiums. If a beneficiary has a Medigap policy and joins a
Medicare Advantage Plan (Part C), they should drop their Medigap policy. To do so, a
beneficiary needs to contact their insurance company.

If a beneficiary has a Medicare Advantage Plan, it is illegal for anyone to sell them a Medigap
policy unless the beneficiary is switching back to Original Medicare. If the beneficiary
disenrolls from the Medicare Advantage Plan, they might not be able to get the same
Medigap policy back. If the beneficiary chooses to switch to Original Medicare and purchase
a Medigap policy, the beneficiary should contact their Medicare Advantage Plan to see if they
are able to disenroll.

31

Medigap plan benefit chart (for illustrative purposes). Find a downloadable version at:
https://www.medicarerights.org/fliers/Medigaps/Whole-Medigap-Packet-(NY).pdf?nrd=1

32

Elderly Pharmaceutical Insurance
Coverage (EPIC) Program
The Elderly Pharmaceutical Insurance Coverage (EPIC) program is a New York State
Pharmaceutical Prescription Assistance Program (SPAP) sponsored by the Department of
Health for income-eligible seniors 65 years old or older to supplement their out-of-pocket
Medicare Part D drug plan cost.

Eligibility:

 Be a New York State resident aged 65 years old or older.
 Have an annual income (based on prior year’s income) below $75,000 if single or
$100,000 if married.
 Be enrolled or eligible to be enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan.
 Not be receiving full Medicaid benefits.

EPIC Coverage:

EPIC will provide secondary coverage for Medicare Part D and EPIC covered drugs
purchased during the:

 Initial Coverage Period

EPIC will also cover many Medicare Part D excluded drugs such as prescription vitamins
and prescription cough and cold preparations.

 All prescriptions must be covered as primary under Medicare Part D plan formulary.
 Drug manufacturer must be participating in the New York State Rebate program.

EPIC Benefits

EPIC provides prescription co-pay assistance, lowering Part D co-pays.

 EPIC co-payments range from $3 to $20 and are based on the cost of the prescription
remaining after being billed to the Medicare Part D drug plan. Once the member is
using their EPIC benefit, they should not pay more than $20 for their prescriptions.

33

EPIC co-payment schedule

Prescription Cost
EPIC Co-Payment
(after submitted to Medicare Part D plan)
Up to $15 $3
$ 15.01 to $35 $7
$ 35.01 to $55 $15
Over $55 $20

EPIC and Medicare Part D Premium Assistance

EPIC provides income-based Part D premium assistance at $72.34 per month for 2025.
Income levels are:

 $23,000 or less (single)
 $29,000 or less (married)

Special Enrollment Period (SEP)

EPIC members will receive a yearly SEP to join or switch a Medicare Part D plan.

 EPIC members receive a Special Enrollment Period (SEP) in addition to the Medicare
Annual Enrollment Period (AEP)
 The SEP cannot be used to drop a Part D plan

Note: New members are eligible for the SEP once they receive their EPIC Identification
Number.

EPIC Plans:

EPIC has two plans based on income.

Fee Plan:

 Single with income of up to $20,000
 Married with joint income of up to $26,000.
 Fee Plan members pay an annual fee ranging from $8 to $300. Members are billed in
quarterly installments or can be paid annually. All fee plan members will receive
Medicare Part D assistance up to $72.34 per month in 2025.
Deductible Plan:

 Single with income from $20,001 and $75,000.
 Married with joint income from $26,001 and $100,000.
 EPIC member must meet an out-of-pocket EPIC deductible based on their previous
34

year’s income before they receive EPIC co-payments.
 Deductible Plan members are grouped into two categories:
o Low Band
o High Band

Low Band High Band
EPIC Deductible members with incomes: EPIC Deductible members with incomes:

 $20,0001 to $23,000 (single)  $23,0001 to $75,000 (single)
 $26,001 to $29,000 (married/joint)  $29,0001 to $100,000 (married/joint)

Will receive Medicare Part D premium Members are responsible for paying their
assistance from EPIC up to the basic Medicare Part D premium each month.
benchmark amount ($72.34 in 2025). Members’ EPIC deductible will be reduced by
the annual benchmark cost of a Medicare Drug
Plan ($868 in 2025).

EPIC and Low-Income Subsidy (LIS)/Extra Help

EPIC members who also qualify for Low Income Subsidy (LIS) or “Extra Help” from Medicare
can save significantly more on their Medicare Part D costs. Extra Help is a federal program
that helps lower most of a member’s prescription cost. EPIC will assist members in applying
for Extra Help. The benefits of having EPIC together with Extra Help include:

 EPIC fees are waived for members with Extra Help.
 Additional savings on generic drugs ($4.90 in 2025) lowered to $3.00; brand name
drugs ($12.15 in 2025) lowered to $3.00.
 Medicare pays Part D premiums up to the benchmark and in 2025 is $72.34; EPIC
can also pay up to an additional benchmark amount after Medicare premium subsidy.

EPIC and Low-Income Subsidy (LIS) and Medicare Savings Program (MSP) Initiative:

 Members will be receiving either the Request for Additional Information (RFAI) or the
Medicare Savings Program (MSP) application based on the income eligibility for these
programs and what the member’s reported income is.
 Non-responders will result in EPIC cancellation.
 If a member signs the “consent to withdraw” on the MSP application and returns it,
they will automatically be cancelled out of the EPIC program.
 If cancelled out of the EPIC program for not responding to the letter/application or
withdrawing from the MSP process, they will have to complete the EPIC application
and whichever application they failed to complete to become an “active” EPIC
member.

35

How to Apply for EPIC:

Older adults can apply for EPIC at any time of the year in the following ways.

 Mailing a completed application to:
EPIC
PO Box 15018
Albany, NY 12212-5018

 Faxing the completed application to:
518-452-3576

 Request an EPIC application from the EPIC Helpline (800-332-3742); visit
https://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/epic/application_contact.htm to download and
print an application; complete an online request for EPIC to mail out an application; or
ask their pharmacists for an application.

EPIC Identification (ID) Card

EPIC members will receive an EPIC ID card following a successful enrollment. Members
should present both their EPIC and Medicare Part D ID cards at the pharmacy when filling
prescriptions. Members who receive their prescriptions through mail order programs must
contact the mail order pharmacy and update their profile with their EPIC membership
information for billing purposes.

Contact Information

Telephone:

EPIC Helpline: 1-800-332-3742 (M-F 8 am to 5 pm)
TTY: 1-800-290-9138
Provider Helpline: 1-800-634-1340
Fax: 518-452-3576

Mailing Address:

EPIC
PO Box 15018
Albany, New York 12212-5018

Email: NYSDOHEPIC@primetherapeutics.com
EPIC Outreach: NYSEPICOutreach@primetherapeutics.com
Website: http://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/epic/

36

Low Income Subsidy Program
Extra Help
The Extra Help program, also known as the Part D Low-Income Subsidy (LIS), helps people
with limited income and resources reduce, or cut, their Part D costs (drug coverage). It aids
with the cost of a beneficiary’s prescription drugs, like deductibles and copays. A beneficiary
can apply for Extra Help at any time before or after they enroll in Part D. A beneficiary will get
Extra Help automatically if they receive:

 Full Medicaid coverage.

 Assistance with paying their Part B premiums from a Medicare Savings Program
(MSP) within their state. This automatic process is referred to as “deeming.”

 Supplemental Security Income (SSI).

A beneficiary will get a letter about their Extra Help benefit, explaining how much they will
pay and their new Medicare drug plan, if they do not have one already.

If a beneficiary does not automatically get Extra Help, they can apply through Social Security
at https://www.ssa.gov/medicare/part-d-extra-help.

Benefits of Extra Help

The Extra Help program (LIS) offers the following benefits:

 Pays for the Part D premium up to a state-specific benchmark amount. The 2025
benchmark amount is $72.34. NYS currently has three benchmark plans in 2025.

 Lowers the cost of prescription drugs.

 Gives beneficiaries a Special Enrollment Period (SEP) once per month to enroll in a
Part D plan or to switch between plans. This SEP is designed specifically for
enrollment into a stand-alone Part D plan. A beneficiary may not use it to enroll into a
Medicare Advantage plan with drug coverage.

 Eliminates any Part D late enrollment penalty the beneficiary may have incurred if
they delayed Part D enrollment.

Best Available Evidence

The U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) created the Best Available
Evidence (BAE) policy to address incorrect Low-Income Subsidy (LIS)/Extra Help cost
sharing data in the electronic data systems of CMS, pharmacy, and Part D plans. BAE
ensures Medicare beneficiaries with LIS aren’t charged too much or have higher copayments
than expected.

37

Assisting Beneficiaries with ‘Extra Help’ Issues at Pharmacy

If the beneficiary’s Extra Help is not acknowledged at the pharmacy, your first step as a
counselor is to contact Medicare and the plan using your SHIP Unique ID to verify eligibility
and help resolve the issue. The plan must accept proper faxed documentation and update
the beneficiary’s LIS information at the pharmacy. It can take anywhere from 2 to 24 hours
for the pharmacy’s system to be updated.

Acceptable Documentation:

 An Extra Help award letter from the Social Security Administration.

 A copy of the beneficiary’s Medicaid card, with eligibility date.

 A print-out from the state enrollment file showing Medicaid status during a month after
June of the previous year.

 A screen-print from the state’s Medicaid system or state document showing
Medicaid status during a month after June of previous calendar year.

The automatic process of enrolling Medicare Savings Program beneficiaries into Extra Help –
referred to as deeming – can take up to 4-6 weeks. The New York State Department of
Health sends an electronic file every month to CMS. It may take time for the lower co-pay
status to be recognized at the pharmacy. Beneficiaries will be reimbursed the difference for
any prescription filled from their effective date. The Extra Help Chart can be found on the
following page.

38

Extra Help Chart (for illustrative purposes). Find a downloadable version at:
https://www.medicarerights.org/fliers/Help-With-Drug-Costs/Extra-Help-Chart.pdf?nrd=1

39

hjj

Medicare Savings Program
(MSP)
The Medicare Savings Program (MSP) program can assist people with limited
income in paying for some of their Medicare premiums. Depending on their
income, the MSP may also pay for other cost-sharing expenses. There is no
resource test for the MSP programs. Additional benefits of enrolling in an MSP
include:

 Allowing a beneficiary to enroll in Medicare Part B outside of
usual enrollment periods.

 Eliminating a beneficiary’s Part B late enrollment penalty if they have one.

 Automatic enrollment in the Extra Help program.

In New York State there are three MSPs: Qualifying Individual (QI), Qualified
Medicare Beneficiary (QMB), and the Qualified Disabled and Working Individual
(QDWI).

The Qualified Medicare Beneficiary Program (QMB):

 Pays for the Medicare Part A and/or Part B premiums.

 Medicare providers should not bill QMB beneficiaries for any Medicare-
covered services that they receive.

 Individuals may also be eligible for Medicaid.

 There is no resource test.

 Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage providers who do not accept
Medicaid must still comply with improper billing protections and cannot bill
QMBs.

 Does not offer retroactive premium reimbursement.

 Is effective the first of the month after application.

Eligibility is based on income:

 For a single individual, the monthly income threshold is $1,820 (includes
$20 disregard).

 For a couple, the monthly income threshold is $2,453 (includes $20
disregard).
40

hjj

The Qualified Individual (QI):

 Pays for the Medicare Part B premium.

 Individuals cannot be eligible for QI and Medicaid.

 The applicant must have Medicare Part A.

 There is no resource test for this program.

 Offers up to three months of retroactive premium reimbursement within the
same year as the effective date.

Eligibly is based on income:

 For a single individual, the monthly income threshold is $2,446 (includes
$20 disregard).

 For a couple, the monthly income threshold is $3,299 (includes $20
disregard).

The Qualified Disabled and Working Individual (QDWI):

 Pays for the Medicare Part A premium only, not Part B.

 The applicant must be a disabled worker under age 65 who lost Part A
benefits because of return to work. The applicant must not be eligible for
Medicaid.

The Qualified Disabled and Working Individual (QDWI) income eligibility is based
on 200% of the federal poverty level.

Medicare Savings Program Budgeting

Earned income includes wages, salary and earnings from self-employment.
Unearned income includes: gross Social Security (before the Part B premium is
deducted); pensions, including disability pensions; and income from retirement
accounts only if asset pays out regularly. Some common MSP income disregards
are interest earned on checking or savings accounts, food stamps, or cash
assistance.

Health insurance premiums can also be used as a disregard. This includes
Medigap, Medicare Advantage, Part D premiums that are “above the benchmark”
amount, Long Term Care Insurance, Union Health Fund and Dental Insurance. For
additional information on MSP budgeting, please refer to
http://health.wnylc.com/health/entry/99/.

41

hjj

Household Sizes

In 2010, the New York State Department of Health modified its rules so that all
married individuals will be considered a household size of two. See the
Department of Health General Information System (GIS) message (10 MA 10) at
https://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/medicaid/publications/gis/10ma010.htm.
(This applies regardless of whether the spouse is also aged, blind or disabled).

There are two exceptions to the household size rule if:

 The couple is not living together.
 One spouse is permanently residing in a nursing home.

MSP Application

Note: The MSP application should be printed on legal size paper as it is too large
for 8x11 print. If printed on 8x11 paper, it may be difficult for an applicant to
complete the application properly.

The Medicare Savings Program application may be found on the NYS Department
of Health website at the following webpage:

https://www.health.ny.gov/forms/doh-4328.pdf

Please see the following two pages to view the current MSP application.

42

hjj

43

hjj

44

hjj

Medicaid
Medicare and Medicaid Beneficiaries
Medicaid renewals reminder

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced that all states
must complete all public health emergency (PHE) unwinding activities, including
Medicaid renewals, by 2026.

New Yorkers with Medicaid or a Medicare Savings Program (MSP) who receive a
renewal packet must complete and return their renewals by their listed
deadline. Packets should include new cover letters warning recipients that they
must submit this renewal. Those who do not will lose their Medicaid and/or
MSP and must reapply.

Landmark Eligibility Increases

The New York State budget included landmark increases to Medicaid and MSP
eligibility, effective January 1, 2023.

For the first time, the Medicaid income levels for individuals will be set at 138%
Federal Poverty Level (FPL) for individuals in the non-MAGI Medicaid
populations (which includes individuals 65+ as well as individuals who are
disabled with Medicare and individuals who are blind with Medicare). Since this is
the same income limit that is used for MAGI Medicaid, many Medicaid recipients
will be able to keep Medicaid with no spend-down once they become enrolled in
Medicare and are shifted to non-MAGI Medicaid.

The 2025 income and resource standards for Medicaid can be found at
https://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/medicaid/publications/docs/gis/25ma03_att
1.pdf.

Resources

Certain resources do not count toward the above limits, such as household goods,
an automobile, pre-paid funeral agreements for the applicant and their spouse, and
a burial fund of up to $1,500 for the applicant or spouse.

Also, the applicant’s and their spouse’s retirement accounts are exempt as long as
they are taking regular distributions from these accounts. IRA distributions are
required even if they are not yet of the age where the IRS requires them. These
distributions are countable as income.

The applicant’s home has an equity limit only if the applicant is seeking home- and
community-based services (HCBS). HCBS includes managed long-term care
(MLTC), adult day care, personal care, consumer-directed assistance through the
local Medicaid agency, or waiver programs. For a single person seeking MLTC or

45

hjj

HCBS services (who does not have a spouse, minor or disabled child living with
them) the equity limit for the home is $1,097,000 (2025).

The Empire Justice Center and Western New York Law Center provide a
downloadable Excel spreadsheet to calculate the 2025 spend-down at
http://health.wnylc.com/health/download/829/.

Individuals Newly Eligible for Medicaid

Some individuals may have had MSP only, not Medicaid, but now are eligible for
Medicaid under the 2025 income limits. In these cases, those who want Medicaid
must submit an entire Medicaid application and Supplement A to their local
Medicaid office. They cannot simply request “rebudgeting.” Those who had QI-1 or
SLIMB and now want to upgrade to QMB must submit the one-page MSP
application at DOH-4328 and may not simply request rebudgeting. Please look for
more about this roll-out at http://www.wnylc.com/health/news/90/.

Individuals who are determined to have excess income need to spend-down a
certain amount of money by incurring medical expenses each month, or paying-in
the spend-down to the local Medicaid agency, to activate Medicaid. Alternatively,
they may deposit their excess income into a Supplemental Needs Trust or pooled
trust to eliminate the spend-down. Fortunately, fewer very low-income people will
have a spend-down because of the increased Medicaid income limits – now at
138% of the federal poverty level (FPL).

Look-Back Penalties

The Medicaid Look-Back for skilled nursing facilities remains at 60 months (five
years). Transfers made within the five years before admission to a nursing home
and application for nursing home Medicaid may cause a “transfer penalty” period
based on the amount transferred. This means that Medicaid will not pay for
nursing home care during the penalty period.

The lookback and transfer penalties still do not apply to Home and Community
Based Services (HCBS), Managed Long-term Care (MLTC), the Medicaid Assisted
Living Program, or any other community-based Medicaid services. However, in
future years, a 30-month lookback on all HCBS services will apply (including
MLTC, immediate need, and the Assisted Living Program) due to a change in the
law in 2020. This change has been delayed because of COVID rules. According to
DOH, the change is not expected to take effect until 2025 for new Medicaid
applications. More information is at:
http://health.wnylc.com/health/news/85/#lookback.

Part A and Part B Coordination with Medicaid and Billing

 Medicare’s Coordination of Benefits will now automatically cross-over and
submit an unpaid bill to Medicaid.

46

hjj

 A doctor who accepts Medicaid must always accept Medicare assignment
on claims.

QMB and Medicaid

Both Medicaid and the Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries (QMB) program
supplement Medicare coverage by paying or preventing (in the case of QMB) out-
of-pocket Medicare cost-sharing (co-insurance and deductibles). Medicaid can
only pay for medical claims to providers who accept Medicaid. Medicaid
additionally provides services and supplies not covered by Medicare or after
Medicare benefits are exhausted.

In 2022, the New York State budget increased the QMB income limit from 100% to
138% of the Federal Poverty Level effective January 1, 2023. This limit is the
same as the new income limit for Medicaid. (Those with incomes above 138% of
the Federal Poverty Level can spend down for Medicaid but their income is too
high for QMB.) Now that the income limit is the same for Medicaid and QMB, all
dual-eligibles who do not have a spend-down are eligible for QMB. Some people
have only QMB but not Medicaid because their assets are above the Medicaid
asset limit.

How Much does Medicaid Pay of Medicare Part B Coinsurance?

Medicaid does not always pay the full 20% Part B coinsurance. How much
Medicaid pays depends on the approved Medicare and Medicaid rates for the
service, and whether the consumer is in a Medicare Advantage Plan. See
http://www.wnylc.com/health/entry/94/#How%20%much%20will%20Medicaid%20p
ay.

Balance Billing Protections

Both QMB and Medicaid beneficiaries have protections from being billed for the
20% Medicare co-insurance and deductibles, but they are slightly different.

Medicaid beneficiaries who do not have QMB are protected from balance billing
only if the doctor/provider accepts Medicaid. QMB beneficiaries cannot be balance
billed even if the provider does not accept Medicaid. See more about balance
billing protections for QMB at http://health.wnylc.com/health/entry/94/.

The doctor may be able to refuse to accept a client for future visits.

Qualifying for QI-1 Medicare Savings Program

Medicare beneficiaries whose income is too high for Medicaid or QMB may qualify
for the QI-1 Medicare Savings Program. Please refer to the Medicare Savings
Program in this resource guide to learn more about this program.

The QI-1 limit has increased from 135% to 187% of FPL. Someone with income

47

hjj

that is too high for Medicaid and whose assets are under the Medicaid limit must
choose between having QI-1 or Medicaid with a spend-down. They cannot have
both.

Billing Issues

Medicaid Billing Concerns can be addressed to:

 Computer Science Corp – 1-800-343-9000.

Pooled Income Trusts and Eligibility

A Pooled Income Trust can be used to bring income below the QMB or QI-1 limit,
as well as below the Medicaid limit. Counselors should always screen dual-eligible
beneficiaries for QMB or QI-1 so they should not be responsible for the Part B
premium (nor responsible for Medicare cost-sharing in the case of QMBs).

New Dual Eligibles Who Had Medicaid Before Enrolling in Medicare

New York has begun auto-enrolling Medicare-eligible individuals who have
Medicaid through New York State of Health (NYSoH) into the Qualified Medicare
Beneficiary (QMB) MSP. This population previously received a monthly
reimbursement check for their Part B premiums via the Medicare Insurance
Premium Payment (MIPP) program. Instead, MSP enrollment has been
automated for this population. Going forward, most beneficiaries with NYSoH
Medicaid who become eligible for Medicare will no longer need to go through the
MSP application process.

Medicare Advantage Plans and Medicare Advantage Dual-Special Needs
Plans

Medicare Advantage plans usually do not contract directly with the state and
therefore present a grey area when it comes to secondary payer for billing issues.
There is no automatic crossover as with Original Medicare.

Medicaid Advantage Dual-Special Needs Plans (Dual-SNP) are designed to work
specifically with a dual-eligible beneficiary.

Default Enrollment of Medicaid Recipients Who Are Newly Ineligible for
Medicare

New Medicare beneficiaries with Medicaid that enrolled in a “mainstream”
Medicaid managed care plan may be “default enrolled” into an aligned Dual-SNP.
This change went into effect starting with those newly eligible for Medicare in April
2021.

For individuals not receiving Medicaid, personal care or CDPAP services from their
mainstream plan, some are default enrolled into an “IB-DUAL” plan (Integrated

48

hjj

Benefit – Dual) plan. This is basically a new name for when a mainstream
Medicaid managed care plan and a Dual-SNP are aligned, meaning that both
plans are operated by the same insurance company, and the state and CMS have
approved the plan to use the default enrollment process.

If the individual receives Medicaid personal care, CDPAP, or private duty nursing
services from their mainstream managed care plan, they may be default enrolled
into a Medicaid Advantage Plus (MAP) plan, which is a hybrid of a Dual-SNP,
MLTC and mainstream Medicaid managed care plan all in one. Default enrollment
into a MAP only occurs when then the insurance company that operates the
mainstream managed care plan also offers a MAP that is approved to use default
enrollment.

Under “default enrollment,” the Medicaid recipient receives a notice 60 days before
they will be automatically enrolled in the Dual-SNP and “IB-DUAL” plan or MAP
plan, with the right to “opt out” and select their preferred Medicare and Medicaid
coverage. Those who receive home care services from their managed care plan
may opt out of MAP and select an MLTC plan instead.

Default enrollment is only being used by some plans in certain counties. A list of those
specific counties may be found on DOH’s new website on integrated care for dual
eligibles: https://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/medicaid/redesign/duals/index.htm.

Under the dropdown for “IB-DUAL” is a chart identifying which plans have been
approved for default enrollment in each county. The MRC Default Enrollment Fact
Sheet can also be referenced at https://medicareinteractive.org/pdf/default-
enrollment-NYS.pdf.

Dual-Eligibles and Medicare Advantage Premiums

Medicare Advantage premiums are a combination of the Part C premium (MA) and
Part D premium. A dual eligible will be deemed eligible for Extra Help, which will
subsidize the Part D premium component of the Medicare Advantage plan up to
the benchmark amount. Neither Extra Help nor Medicaid will cover additional Part
C premiums above the benchmark amount.

Dual-Eligibles and Prescription Drug Coverage

All dual-eligible beneficiaries will be automatically deemed (enrolled) into Extra
Help. A dual-eligible beneficiary must have Medicare Part D. Medicaid no longer
covers prescription drugs for dual-eligibles, except for some over-the-counter
drugs and supplies. If a dual-eligible does not join a prescription drug plan, they
will be automatically and randomly assigned into a benchmark drug prescription
plan. If they choose not to participate in a prescription drug plan, they will have no
drug coverage. If a dual-eligible has creditable drug coverage through an employer
or union or spouse, they are not automatically enrolled into a Part D plan. This is to
prevent duals from jeopardizing their employer or union coverage.

49

hjj

Medicaid no longer covers prescriptions for dual-eligible beneficiaries, even if the
Part D plan does not cover a specific Part D drug (because it is not in the
formulary or requires prior authorization or step therapy). Only drugs that are
excluded by law from being covered by the Medicare Part D plans, such as select
prescription vitamins and over-the-counter drugs, are covered by New York State
Medicaid for dual-eligible patients.

Claims for over-the-counter medications and prescription vitamins can be billed by
the pharmacist directly to Medicaid as they are not covered under the Medicare
Part D benefit.

Medicaid also does not cover compound prescriptions for the dually eligible
population. Patients and providers should consult the appropriate Medicare Part D
or Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug (MA-PD) plan for coverage of
compounded prescriptions for medically accepted indications. Medicaid will cover
compounded prescriptions for New York State Medicaid beneficiaries who are not
Medicare eligible.

If a dual eligible beneficiary or LIS recipient is billed at the incorrect cost-share
level at the pharmacy, the plan must override the subsidy-level data and apply the
appropriate cost-sharing level until CMS’s systems are updated. The pharmacist or
beneficiary must contact or fax a document to the plan showing that the individual
has Medicaid, an MSP, or Extra Help. See the Best Available Evidence Policy in
the Medicare Part D section. This most commonly happens for someone newly
approved for Medicaid or MSP who is not yet coded as having Extra Help.

When a dual-eligible or MSP beneficiary goes to the pharmacy and there is no
evidence of a Part D plan, but there is clear evidence of both Medicare and
Medicaid or MSP, the pharmacist is required to bill the Limited Income Net
program (LINET). A 31-day supply of the drug will be provided. See the
LINET/Point of Sale in the Medicare Part D section.

A dual-eligible beneficiary may switch plans once per month to enroll in a stand-
alone Part D plan with Original Medicare or an integrated Dual-SNP. They may
also switch plans: Once they are notified of a change of LIS or dual status, if they
are admitted to a nursing home, or if they were assigned by CMS or their state
(e.g., auto-assigned, reassignment, passive enrollment).

Spend-down to Medicaid

If a person’s income is above the Medicaid limit, the client may qualify for Medicaid
by incurring medical bills in an amount that is equal to or greater than the monthly
spend-down. To calculate the spend-down, the spouse’s income also counts if
they live together, even if the spouse is not applying, unless the spouse does a
“spousal refusal.” (There is a rare exception – if the spouse is under age 65 and
not disabled, their income does not count if it is under the “allocation amount” of
$633/month in 2025. In that case, just like in spousal refusal, use the income limit
for a single not a couple.)

50

hjj

The spend-down must be met each month to have ongoing Medicaid coverage
using a bill incurred in the current month. A bill incurred and paid in the current
month can be used to meet the spend-down for a period of up to six months.

While people already on Medicaid may only utilize bills incurred in the current
month to meet the spend-down for that month, there is a special rule for new
applicants that allows them to use past bills (incurred and paid in the three
calendar months prior to the month of application or in the month of application).
These past bills can be used to meet the spend-down for up to six months
beginning in the month of application or retroactively up to three calendar months
prior to the month of application. The applicant may also be reimbursed for these
paid bills once the spend-down is met if the provider accepts Medicaid.

Unpaid Bills and Spend-down

Unpaid medical bills may be used to meet the spend-down as long as they are
viable, meaning a provider can sue to collect the money (generally a six-year time
limit). These bills may be used to meet the spend-down beginning in the month of
application or retroactively up to three calendar months prior to the month of
application. Unlike paid bills, there is no limit on the length of time these bills can
be used to meet the spend-down.

Example

For example, if Mary has a $200/month spend-down and had a $4,000 dental bill
five months before she applies for Medicaid, the bill can be used to meet the
spend-down for 20 months, beginning in the month of her application or, at her
option, retroactively three calendar months before she applies.

Medicaid, however, is authorized in maximum periods of six months. She will be
initially authorized for six months of Medicaid using $1,200 of the bill. The next two
six-month authorizations will each use up $1,200 more of the bill until a total of
$3,600 has been exhausted. The next and last $400 authorization will be for 2
months, unless she has additional current bills.

Counties have different procedures for how to make sure the unpaid bills continue
to be applied to renew the authorization after the first six-month period. NYC HRA
requires advocacy to make this happen.

Other Considerations

 A bill only needs to be incurred to count toward the spend-down. It does not
have to be paid. The date the medical service occurred is what counts, not
the date of the bill.

 Medical bills of the spouse can be used to meet the client’s spend-down,
and bills for any dependent child under age 21 can be used toward spend-

51

hjj

down.

 The spend-down must be met just once to receive Extra Help for the entire
calendar year. If that person meets this one-time spend-down in July or
later, they will receive Extra Help for the rest of that year and the following
calendar year.

Which Expenses Count

The following types of expenses can be used to meet the spenddown:

 Deductibles and coinsurance for Medicare, Part D or other private health
insurance.

 Services that are medically necessary such as chiropractors, podiatrists,
drugs the Part D plan won’t cover, bills of doctors who don’t take Medicaid,
and over-the-counter items.

 EPIC or ADAP. The amount EPIC or ADAP pays (not just the client’s co-
payment) counts toward the spend-down. This includes EPIC or ADAP
payment during the three months before the month that the client applies for
Medicaid.

 Hospital bills. To cover an inpatient hospital stay, even for just one night,
Medicaid requires the individual to meet six months of spend-down instead
of one month. This is true for Medicaid to cover the Medicare Part A
hospital deductible. For example, Pat is hospitalized for one night and has a
spend-down of $200. The Part A hospital deductible is $1,676 in 2024. Pat
is responsible for six months of the spend-down ($1,200). Medicaid will pay
$476. However, if Pat has QMB, QMB/Medicaid will pay the entire Part A
hospital deductible.

Ways to Reduce or Eliminate the Spend-down

There are various strategies to reduce or eliminate the spend-down, as described
below. More info on these and other strategies can be found at
http://www.wnylc.com/health/entry/222/.

Spousal Impoverishment Income Protections

The expense of nursing home care, which ranges from $8,000 to $25,000 a month
or more, can rapidly deplete the lifetime savings of elderly couples. In 1988,
Congress enacted provisions to prevent “spousal impoverishment," which can
leave the spouse who is still living at home in the community (the “community
spouse”) with little or no income or resources if all of the “sick” spouse’s income
and resources are used to pay for their nursing home care. These provisions
enable community spouses to keep enough of the couple’s combined income and
resources to live with independence and dignity. Spousal impoverishment
52

hjj

protections apply to married nursing home residents after the 29th day of
admission. These provisions have been extended to community spouses of
individuals receiving:

 Medicaid managed long term care (MLTC) – but only after the “sick” spouse
is enrolled in the plan. When the applicant first applies for Medicaid in order
to enroll in MLTC, they must use “spousal refusal.” Then, once enrolled,
they may request spousal impoverishment budgeting from the local
Medicaid office.

 “Immediate Need” personal care or Consumer Directed Personal
Assistance Program (CDPAP) services – unlike MLTC, spousal
impoverishment budgeting is available upon the initial application for
Medicaid if applying for Immediate Need.

 Traumatic Brain Injury or Nursing Home Transition & Diversion waivers
(known as Home and Community Based Services, or HCBS, waivers).

When a “sick” spouse is in a nursing facility or is in one of the three long-term care
programs listed above, an assessment of both spouses’ individually owned and
joint resources is made. The couple's resources, regardless of ownership, are
combined for purposes of assessing the spousal impoverishment resource
allowance. The same exemptions apply as in the community, listed at the
beginning of this section. The home is exempt if the community spouse is residing
there, regardless of its value.

The Medicaid spouse may keep countable resources up to the single resource
limit used in the community ($32,396 in 2025). If the Medicaid Spouse has more
countable resources solely in his/her name or held jointly with the “community
spouse,” the Medicaid spouse may transfer resources that exceed the resource
limit of $32,396 to the community spouse. Transfers to anyone else – with
exceptions – may cause a “transfer penalty.”

The community spouse may keep $74,820 of the couple’s combined resources,
apart from exempt resources described above. If the community spouse has more
than $74,820, then he or she may keep up to one-half of the couple’s combined
resources up to $157,920 (2025). If the couple has more resources, they should
consult an elder law attorney for other options, as excess countable resources
may be considered available to the Medicaid spouse. These options may include
the community spouse seeking an order of support or requesting a fair hearing to
allow the spouse to keep more resources in order to generate investment income if
the spouse’s income is otherwise below the minimum monthly maintenance needs
standard. Once resource eligibility is determined, any resources belonging to the
community spouse are no longer considered available to the spouse in the medical
facility.

A Medicaid spouse may use all or part of his or her income to support the
community spouse, depending on the spouse's own income. If the community
53

hjj

spouse has his or her own income that is less than the "minimum monthly
maintenance needs allowance" (MMMNA) of $3,948/month in 2025, then
the community spouse may keep his/her own income plus enough of the Medicaid
spouse's income to bring the total up to the MMMNA level. This is called the
“community spouse monthly income allowance" (CSMIA).

The MMMNA is calculated after applying allowable deductions. If the community
spouse’s income exceeds the MMMNA, Medicaid will ask for a contribution of 25%
over that amount for the Medicaid spouse’s care. For MLTC and waiver programs,
if the community spouse’s income exceeds the MMMNA, Medicaid can do a
comparison budget treating the Medicaid spouse as a household of one and only
counting his/her income. Medicaid should choose the budgeting that is most
advantageous. In a nursing home, the Medicaid spouse may keep only $50/month
plus enough to pay any Medigap or other health insurance programs.

For MLTC and waiver programs, the Medicaid spouse may keep $633/month
(2025) and enough to pay any Medigap or other health insurance premiums.

If the client is married and the spouse does not need or qualify for Medicaid, the
client may still apply if the spouse refuses to make income and resources
available. With spousal refusal, the budget is considered “single.” The county may
have the right to sue the “refusing” spouse for support. Each county has different
policies. Also note that if/when the new “lookback” for home-and community-based
care eligibility begins, no earlier than 2025, the spouse’s resources must be
documented for the 30-month lookback period. This is true even if the spouse
does a spousal refusal. This is because transfers made by the spouse during the
lookback period can trigger a transfer penalty that disqualifies the applying spouse
from eligibility for home care or other HCBS services. See more about the new
lookback above.

Special Income Deduction for People Who Left a Nursing Home or Adult
Home and Enrolled in or Remained Enrolled in an MLTC Plan

If an individual was in a nursing home or an adult home for 30 days or more, and
Medicaid paid toward the nursing home care, and now the individual is discharged
home and enrolls in or remains enrolled in an MLTC plan, they may keep an
additional amount of income to pay for their rent or mortgage. This reduces or
even eliminates their spend-down. The current amounts – which vary by region in
the state – are posted at http://www.wnylc.com/health/entry/212/. Clients cannot
use both this housing deduction and “spousal impoverishment” budgeting – they
must pick one or the other.

Special Deductions from Income as a Work Incentive

If a person who is age 65+, blind, or disabled works, the first $65 of monthly gross
earned income is disregarded. Then half of the remaining earned income is
disregarded. If their spouse is working and the spouse is not using spousal refusal,
their earned income uses the same disregards. If the applicant or recipient is

54

hjj

disabled and under age 65, they also have a higher income limit of 250% of the
Federal Poverty Level. This is called the Medicaid Buy-In for Working People with
Disabilities (MBI-WPD). See http://health.wnylc.com/health/entry/59/. While older
adults do not presently benefit from that higher income limit, they do get the
special earned income disregard.

For other special budgeting rules (for disabled adult children, etc.), see
http://health.wnylc.com/health/entry/222/.

Pooled Income Trusts to Reduce or Eliminate the Spend-Down and Qualify
for QMB

An individual, whether married or single, with a spend-down may enroll in a Pooled
Income Trust to reduce or eliminate the spend-down. These trusts are sponsored
by non-profit organizations. The person who enrolls in the trust may deposit their
spend-down into the trust every month. For a small fee that varies between trusts,
the trust then pays the individual’s rent or other expenses. Once the individual
enrolls, the trust must be submitted to the local Medicaid program with a request
for a disability determination. That request is referred to the New York State
Disability Review Unit, which will request forms that show that the individual is
disabled. One form must be signed by the individual’s physician and the other is
completed by the applicant explaining the individual’s work, educational and
medical history. For more information, see http://www.wnylc.com/health/entry/44/.

In 2025, many recipients will be able to reduce the amount they contribute to
pooled trusts – or even close the trusts altogether – because of the increase in
Medicaid income limits.

 TIP: An individual does not need to wait until the local Medicaid agency re-
budgets their spend-down using the increased 2025 income limits in order
to reduce their contribution to the trust. If the spend-down is correctly
calculated, the individual may adjust the contribution now. When they go
through the “unwinding” renewal described above, if the budget calculation
was correct, the Verification of Deposits in the reduced amount should be
sufficient to offset the spend-down. Download the Excel document to
calculate spend-down at http://health.wnylc.com/health/download/829/.
Note that this calculator uses the 2024 FPLs.

See also the Fact Sheet on Pooled Trusts to Reduce the Medicaid Spend-down at
http://www.wnylc.com/health/entry/6/.

New York Independent Assessor Program for Eligibility to Receive Medicaid
Personal Care or CDPAP services

The New York Independent Assessor Program (NYIAP) replaced the Conflict Free
Eligibility & Evaluation Center for those seeking Medicaid personal care or CDPAP
services. (See https://nyia.com/en.) NYIAP must now also be used when seeking
services through the local Medicaid office, whether through Immediate Need or

55

hjj

through the regular process for those who are exempt from MLTC (in the OPWDD,
NHTD or TBI waiver or receiving home hospice care). NYIAP must also be used
for a “mainstream” managed care member to request personal care or CDPAP.

For more information see:
http://health.wnylc.com/health/entry/253/

View a webinar on NYIAP at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgEpSmt9528

56

hjj

Managed Long-Term Care
(MLTC)
Managed long-term care (MLTC) health plans provide services for some
chronically ill New Yorkers and/or those with disabilities. MLTC plans are available
on a regional basis to those who have Medicare and Medicaid (dually eligible
individuals) and require long-term care services and supports. However, it is
possible for a Medicaid only individual to enroll in MLTC if they require certain
services not included in the mainstream managed care plan benefit package.
MLTC is one of several demonstration programs across the country with the goal
of providing better and more coordinated care for dually eligible individuals while
reducing health care expenditures where possible. MLTC plans are approved by
the New York State Department of Health. These plans provide coverage for a
number of services, including:

 Home care (including personal care and skilled nursing care)
 Adult day health care (medical only, or medical and social together)
 Home-delivered meals and congregate meals
 Medical equipment, durable medical equipment (DME), eyeglasses, hearing
aids, home modifications
 Non-emergency medical transportation
 podiatry, dentistry, optometry, nursing home care, as well as physical,
speech, and occupational therapies.

Coordination of Medicare Benefits and MLTC

Having an MLTC plan does not affect a beneficiary’s Medicare. This means that
Original Medicare or the Medicare Advantage Plan remains the beneficiary’s
primary payer, paying first for the care the beneficiary receives from hospitals,
primary care doctors, and specialists. The beneficiary’s Medicare prescription drug
coverage also remains unchanged.

Dual-eligible individuals (having both Medicare and Medicaid) who are age 21 and
older and who are assessed as needing community based long term care services
for more than 120 days must enroll in MLTC in order to receive those services.

Dual-eligible nursing home residents who are age 21 and older and determined to
need permanent nursing home placement must join an MLTC plan.

The following may voluntarily enroll in MLTC:

 Dual-eligible individuals, age 18 to 20, who have been assessed as eligible
for nursing home level of care at time of enrollment and also assessed as
needing community based long term care services for more than 120 days;
and

 Non-dual-eligible individuals, age 18 and older, who have been assessed
57

hjj

as eligible for a nursing home level of care at time of enrollment and also
assessed as needing community-based long term care services for more
than 120 days.

For assistance with MLTC counseling, please contact the Independent Consumer
Advocacy Network (ICAN) at 844-614-8800 or ican@cssny.org.

Resources

Individuals can call the state DOH complaint line at 1-866-712-7197. More
information may be found at:
http://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/managed_care/mltc/aboutmltc.htm.

58

hjj

Medicare
Marketing Rules
The Medicare Communications and Marketing Guidelines are rules that private
insurance companies that sell Medicare plans must follow when promoting their
products. Independent agents and brokers selling plans must be licensed by the
state, and the plan must tell the state which agents are selling their plans.

People representing Medicare plans are not permitted to:

 Ask for a beneficiary’s personal information (like Medicare, Social Security,
bank account, or credit card numbers) over the phone unless it is needed to
verify membership, determine enrollment eligibility, or process an
enrollment request. Plans do not need a beneficiary’s personal information
to give a quote.

 Come to a beneficiary’s home uninvited to sell or endorse anything.

 Call a beneficiary unless they are already a member of the plan.

 Require a beneficiary to speak to a sales agent to get information about the
plan.

 Offer beneficiaries cash (or gifts worth more than $15) to join their plan or
give them free meals during a sales pitch for a Medicare health or drug
plan.

 Ask a beneficiary for payment over the phone or online. The plan must send
the beneficiary a bill.

 Sell a beneficiary a non-health related product, like an annuity or life
insurance policy, during a sales pitch for a Medicare health or drug plan.

 Set an appointment to meet with a beneficiary about their plan unless the
beneficiary first agrees to do so. During the appointment, the agent or
broker may only try to sell the beneficiary products that the beneficiary has
agreed to discuss.

 Talk to a beneficiary about plans in areas where the beneficiary receives
health care, such as an exam room, hospital patient room, or at a pharmacy
counter.

 Market their plans or enroll a beneficiary during an educational event such
as a health fair or conference.

59

hjj

Rules when Meeting with an Agent

If a beneficiary is meeting with an agent, the agent must follow all of the above
rules for selling Medicare plans along with some specific rules for meeting with
beneficiaries.

During the meeting, Medicare plans and people who work with Medicare are
permitted to:

 Give a beneficiary plan materials.

 Tell a beneficiary about plan options and how to get more plan information.

 Give a beneficiary an enrollment form.

 Collect a beneficiary’s completed enrollment form.

 Distribute business cards for a beneficiary to share with friends, family, etc.

During the meeting, Medicare plans and people who work with Medicare are not
permitted to:

 Charge a fee to a beneficiary to process their enrollment into a plan.

 Steer or direct a beneficiary into a particular plan.

 Communicate incorrect information about a plan type or use inappropriate
statements (i.e. Stating that a certain plan is "the best" or "highest ranked").

 Tell a beneficiary about other plan options that they have not agreed to
discuss, unless the beneficiary specifically asks about them. (To discuss
these options, the beneficiary must first complete a separate appointment
form.)

 Pressure a beneficiary to join a plan by saying things such as "you have to
join this plan,” or “you will not have coverage next year."

 Ask a beneficiary to provide names, phone numbers or addresses of
friends, family, etc. so that the agent may attempt to sell plans to them.

 Ask a beneficiary to sign an enrollment form before they are ready to join.

After the meeting:

 The plan should contact a beneficiary to confirm that they want to join the
plan, and that the beneficiary understands how the plan works.

 The agent who assists a beneficiary with joining a plan may call the
60

hjj

beneficiary to discuss other plan options.

Reporting a Possible Violation

 For CMS NYRO marketing concerns and questions, contact
NYROMarketingQuestions@cms.hhs.gov.

 More information can be found at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-
Plans/ManagedCareMarketing/FinalPartCMarketingGuidelines.

61

hjj

Medicare Complaints
A beneficiary may wish to file a complaint if they have concerns about the quality
of care or other services that they have received from a Medicare provider,
prescription drug plan, or a Medicare Advantage plan. NYSOFA HIICAP, Medicare
and the plan can aid the beneficiary in navigating the complaint process.

Case Resolution Process

The case resolution process involves the following steps:

1. Work with the Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug (MAPD) Plan or the
Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) first. Some plans have a dedicated SHIP line.
If so, you can use your SHIP Unique ID number to obtain information.

2. If you are unable to resolve the case by working directly with the plan, use
your SHIP Unique ID to contact Medicare through the dedicated SHIP line
listed below. This will allow you to obtain more information, such as the
beneficiary’s current insurance status, Part A & Part B effective dates, their
enrollment history, or their low-income subsidy status.

Medicare’s Dedicated SHIP number: 1-888-647-6701

Once you are connected, an automated voice will prompt you to enter your Unique
ID, then choose from one of the options listed below.

Option 1: General Medicare Issues (including Part D)
Option 2: Part A Issues
Option 3: Part B Issues
Option 4: Medical Equipment Issues
Option 5: To Dis-enroll from a Part D Plan

If you are unable to resolve the case after contacting the plan and Medicare,
please reach out to NYSOFA HIICAP for case work assistance. You can reach us
by phone or email. Please note that emails should not contain personal identifying
information (PII). Once NYSOFA receives the case information, NYSOFA HIICAP
will:

 Follow up with a phone call directly to the coordinator or counselor to obtain
additional details for case resolution. In some instances, NYSOFA HIICAP
can resolve the case without escalation.

 Follow up and request that a Complaint Tracking Module (CTM) form be
completed for escalation to the plan or U.S. Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS).

62

hjj

 The CTM form may be found on page 64. Please be sure to complete all
fields within the form as this information is imperative to further investigating
each case. Please send CTM forms by fax only as these forms generally
contain PHI and sensitive information. The NYSOFA HIICAP fax number is
518-486-2225.

 If a CTM is filed, the plan will work directly with NYSOFA HIICAP to provide
updates and information; NYSOFA HIICAP will update the local coordinator
and/or counselor once a resolution is reached.

Agent Misrepresentation

If you feel that a sales agent pressured or misled a beneficiary into enrolling in a
plan, please report the name of the agent and their company to 1-800-Medicare or
the state Department of Finance online at https://www.dfs.ny.gov/complaint.

Other Resources

New York State Senior Medicare Patrol (SMP): SMP’s mission is to empower
and assist Medicare beneficiaries, their families, and caregivers to prevent, detect,
and report health care fraud, errors, and abuse through outreach, counseling, and
education. You can report suspected problems to NY SMP at 800-333-4374.

Office of the Medicaid Inspector General (OMIG): For Medicaid Fraud
allegations, contact the Office of the Medicaid Inspector General
(https://omig.ny.gov) at BMFA@omig.ny.gov or toll-free at 877-873-7283.

63

hjj

Complaint Tracking Module Form (for illustrative purposes). Please contact
NYSOFA to request a copy of the form.

64

hjj

Contact Numbers for Plans in New York State
The numbers below have been dedicated to SHIP Counselors to solve complex
and escalated issues. These numbers should not be given to clients. You may still
be required to provide additional information due to HIPAA regulations.

Organization Name Plan Name Phone Number
CVS Caremark CVS Caremark Plans 866-490-2098

Express Scripts Express Scripts 800-846-4917

Humana Humana 888-666-2902

SilverScript SilverScript Prescription Plans 888-831-3049

All Medicare Advantage and
WellCare Health Plans 866-675-8574
Prescription Drug Plans

Don’t forget, you can use your SHIP Unique ID with Medicare by calling 1-888-
647-6701!

65

hjj

Plan Finder
The Medicare Plan Finder is an online searchable tool on the www.medicare.gov
website that allows users to compare Medicare plan options, including Medicare
Advantage plans, Medicare Part D plans, and Medigap supplemental policies.

Plan Finder includes a listing of prescription drugs that is updated on a regular basis.
However, it should be noted, Plan Finder does not include each and every drug
that is covered under Medicare:

 If you can't find the drug, contact the plan to find out if it is covered.

 Remember that Medicare drug plans may choose to cover some, or all,
of the drugs that Medicare covers.

 Plans may also cover drugs that aren't listed. Plan Finder doesn’t show
pricing for over-the-counter drugs or diabetic supplies (ex. test strips,
lancets, needles), so these items may not be applied when using this
tool to search for plans.

Several factors affect drug prices: drug dosage and quantity selected, pharmacy
selection, the subsidy level of a beneficiary, as well as the actual timing of a drug
purchase. Plan Finder provides estimated pricing for what a beneficiary will pay at
a given pharmacy. If the dosages and frequencies entered on Plan Finder are
different than those prescribed to a beneficiary, then they may end up paying
prices that do no match up to those estimated in Plan Finder. For this reason, it is
important to utilize the exact dosages, frequencies and quantities when searching
for drugs on Plan Finder.

A network pharmacy is a pharmacy that a plan contracts with to offer drugs at a
certain price. Some plans distinguish network pharmacies as preferred over other
pharmacies because they may offer better drug prices or better benefits.

The Plan Finder does not calculate penalties. It is the responsibility of the plan to
determine penalties when processing enrollments.

Due to HIPAA regulations, personal information such as Health Insurance Claim
Number (HICN), Effective Date, Last Name, Date of Birth (DOB) and Zip Code will
be erased when the ‘Back’ button is used during a personalized search.

66

hjj

If the 'Confirmation' page displays with a 14-digit confirmation number, the
enrollment has been saved. This confirmation number should be written down, or the
confirmation page should be printed, so that the counselor and/or the beneficiary may
have a record of the enrollment. In the event that a beneficiary may need to cancel an
enrollment, they may need to call the plan directly or 1-800-MEDICARE and may
need the enrollment confirmation number when doing so. You may also use the
"Email Your Confirmation" button to send an email to yourself, or the beneficiary,
containing all the information on the confirmation page.

Technical Problems

Counselors must first contact 1-800-Medicare to report a Plan Finder problem. The
customer service representative (CSR) will log your issue. If assistance is still
needed, please follow-up with NYSOFA HIICAP.

67

hjj

HIICAP Reporting
The State Health Insurance Assistance Program (SHIP) Tracking and Reporting
System (STARS) is the nationwide, web-based data system that facilitates the
reporting of SHIP grantee activities to the federal government. See
https://stars.acl.gov.

STARS is a federal data system that is managed and housed by Booz Allen
Hamilton. STARS offers a modernized user experience for SHIPs as they work to
provide Medicare beneficiaries with information, counseling, and enrollment
assistance.

Compliance with the reporting requirement is a term and condition of each Area
Agency on Aging or its subcontractor who receives a HIICAP and/or MIPPA grant
award(s). Federal funding requires SHIPs to use the SHIP Tracking and Reporting
System (STARS). HIICAP reporting is web-based and secured. Booz Allen
Hamilton, the SHIP Technical Assistance Center, and NYSOFA provide technical
assistance to area agencies as needed via training, manuals, online help, and
phone contact.

Continued funding for this program is contingent upon accurate quality data.
Quality data:

 Provides local, state, and national sponsors with statistics to justify
continued support.

 Documents the valuable services that you have performed.

 Helps to maintain the highest quality of services.

User Profiles

All HIICAP Coordinators, Counselors, Volunteers, Subcontractors and MCCAP
Agencies who will be reporting HIICAP and/or MIPPA activities must be registered
in the federal reporting system STARS. User profiles in the STARS system are
referred to as “team member” profiles and consist of nineteen required fields to
register. Counselors and volunteers will need to provide their HIICAP Coordinator
with the required information, which will then be forwarded to NYSOFA for the
creation of the team member profile. Once a team member profile has been
created by NYSOFA, the team member will receive a username and temporary
login information (credentials) from STARS (Booz Allen Hamilton, the federal
reporting contractor).

Once registered, you can sign in at https://stars.acl.gov and enter client data and
activities by using the Beneficiary Contact Form (BCF), the Group Outreach and
Education Form (GOEF), or the Media Outreach and Education Form (MOEF).
Each local HIICAP counselor should use hard copies of these forms to ensure all
data fields are captured and reporting is accurate. The BCF, GOEF and the MOEF
68

hjj

should be printed and provided to each counselor so that they can record each
counseling session, as well as every outreach and education event. The recorded
data should then be entered into the online Reporting System. The BCF, GOEF
and the MOEF forms are available for download through the SHIP TA Center:
https://www.shiphelp.org/.

Locked Accounts and Direct Entry Users

The STARS system may automatically lock a user from logging in after 120 days
of reporting inactivity. While NYSOFA HIICAP staff may be able to reactivate a
lapsed account, the lapsed user may also need to reach out to Booz Allen
Hamilton at boozallenstarshelpdesk@bah.com to unlock their accounts and
receive their log-in credentials.

Booz Allen Hamilton has implemented a 90-day password change policy. Direct
entry users will need to change their passwords every 90 days. If more than 90
days has passed since a user has logged into STARS, they may use the Forgotten
Username or Password feature at https://stars.acl.gov.

Multi-Factor Authentication

As of 5/17/2025, a multi-factor authentication process has been implemented for
STARS access, by sending a unique code to the user’s email address that is only
valid for five minutes. STARS only allows a user’s email address that is pre-
established in STARS, as the sole means of authentication. If a user’s email
address has changed, and must be updated within the STARS system, please
contact NYSOFA HIICAP for further assistance.

Importance of Timely Data

NYSOFA HIICAP regularly monitors the data captured by STARS. Counselors are
advised to set a specific time aside each day/week to enter data so that you don’t
fall behind in recording your information. STARS data is utilized to fulfill real time
legislative and administrative requests. Please do not wait until the reports are
due. Maintaining accurate records is very important.

The SHIP Tracking and Reporting System (STARS) consists of the following
forms:

1. The Beneficiary Contact Form (BCF)
2. The Group Outreach and Education Form (GOEF)
3. The Media Outreach and Education Form (MOEF)
4. The Activity Form
5. The Training Form

69

hjj

Beneficiary Contact Form (BCF)

The BCF records all beneficiary contacts. Contacts can be made over the phone,
in person at the office or in a home or facility, via postal mail, e-mail, web-based
platforms such as Skype, or by fax. Enter all beneficiary contact data under the
Tracking Inbox, New Beneficiary Contact tab (https://stars.acl.gov). Counselors are
encouraged to collect as much demographic information (age, sex, income,
ethnicity) as possible with each counseling session.

The Group Outreach and Education Form (GOEF)

The GOEF captures the type and number of group outreach activities such as
Booths/Exhibits (Health Fairs, Senior Fairs or Community Events), Enrollment
Events, and Interactive Presentations to the Public (In-Person, Video Conference,
Web-based Events, Teleconference, Pre-recorded webinars with follow-up contact
info), as well as the topics covered and their target audiences. To input data, go to
Tracking Inbox, under the New Group Outreach and Education tab
(https://stars.acl.gov). The Group Outreach Form should be completed at least
once per quarter.

The Media Outreach and Education Form (MOEF)

The MOEF captures the type and number of media outreach activities such as
Billboard, Email, Magazine, Newsletter, Newspaper, Radio, Social Media,
Television, Website, and other media source, as well as the topics covered and
their target audiences. To input data, go to the Tracking Inbox, under the New
Media Outreach and Education tab (https://stars.acl.gov). The Media Outreach
Form should be completed at least once per quarter.

The Activity Form

The Activity tab associated with each saved team member profile in STARS is how
you access the Activity Form in STARS. It allows team members to enter their own
time spent on activities not captured on the other STARS forms, and it allows
users with access to others’ team member forms to enter that time on their behalf,
if desired. Options include Administrative Support, Program Management, and
Other SHIP Activities. The Activity Form is counted in the annual Resource Report.
The Activity Form should be completed at least once per quarter.

The Training Form

The Training form is designed to capture specific orientation, training, and testing
activities for SHIP (HIICAP) and MIPPA team members. The Training form is
accessed under the Tracking Inbox to capture in-person, virtual/online trainings
and self-paced training conducted on the local level. Examples include CMS
Medicare Updates, SHIP TA training (i.e., Medicare Minutes, STARS training),
orientation and locally developed HIICAP Training. As established, NYSOFA will
report attendance at the Spring and Fall Regional Medicare Updates Trainings, the

70

hjj

two-day Coordinators’ training and the monthly coordinator calls, as well as time
spent completing the annual HIICAP Exam. The training form should be completed
at least once per quarter.

Please note: It is important to obtain all data and complete each section of all
forms for input into the STARS reporting system.

SHIPs must submit data to STARS monthly. The schedule below displays the
timeline by which data should be entered directly into STARS.

Month Effort Occurred Data Entry Due Dates for Efforts
April May 31
May June 30
June July 31
July August 31
August September 30
September October 31
October November 30
November December 31
December January 31
January February 28
February March 31
March April 30

Data Entry Timelines

 Beneficiary Contacts, Group Outreach and Education Events, Media
Outreach and Education Events must be entered by the end of the following
month.

 Data from April 1 to March 31 of the following calendar year must be
entered by April 30 of that following year (12-month period). For example,
data collected between April 1, 2025 and March 31, 2026 should be entered
by no later than April 30, 2026.

 Late data for the current contract year will not be accepted after the April 30
due date.

NYSOFA will contact all Agency Area on Aging Directors for data that has not
been reported timely, as late data will cause counties to lose credit for work
submitted after reporting deadlines.

71

hjj

Resource Report

The Resource Report is used to gather metrics on the various demographics of
users in the STARS system. The report provides a summary of active users and
logs the amount of time spent completing various activities during a given
timeframe. The Resource Report is now a system generated report which pulls
data from team member profiles and all forms entered.

The annual reporting period for the Resource Report is from April 1 to March 31.
All Beneficiary Contacts, Group Outreach and Education events and Media
Outreach and Education Events should be entered into STARS by April 30.

Note: The below applies to those who utilize the Statewide Client Data
System for reporting.

Correcting Errors

In order for records to meet pre-validation and be sent to the Federal SHIP
Tracking and Reporting System (STARS) through an Application Programming
Interface (API) model, the STARS queue should be processed frequently by each
local program to address error messages and validate records for STARS
submission. API submission is scheduled by NYSOFA HIICAP. Reporting
deadlines are sent out monthly via e-mail to HIICAP coordinators. It is important to
process your STARS queue to comply with reporting requirements. If you fail to
process your STARS queue, it will result in late data. Below is guidance on how to
correct error messages in the STARS queue:

How to correct errors:

1. To see records with errors, select Error from the status dropdown.
2. Enter or select the date range you are searching for.
3. Click Go.
4. Click on the Name to navigate to the record to correct. The identified error
will display on the record.
5. Once you have corrected the error, continue to Save or Save & Exit until
you return to the queue.
6. Once error(s) are fixed, click Process Queue. A message ‘Complete’ should
then appear in red font. Once this message appears, click Go to refresh the
changes. Note: Corrected records will now display on the pending queue.

Additional Considerations

Currently the API endpoint will not accept the following data elements:

 SHIP Team Member Profiles (to be created by NYS HIICAP staff only)
 File Attachments
 Content updates

72

hjj

Therefore, while all client contacts and outreach data entered into the Statewide
Client Data System will be uploaded into STARS through the API process, all data
associated with SHIP Team Member Profiles, File Attachments, and Content
Updates need to be directly entered into STARS.

 Beneficiary (Client Contact) Additional Session
 Group Additional Team Members (Presenters)
 Media Additional Team Members (Presenters)
 SHIP Team Member Activity Form
 Training Form

Additional Info

NYSOFA provides ample notice and reminders when reports are due. You can find
Web and Data Technical Support as noted below:

STARS Technical Support
Booze Allen Hamilton
Booz Allen STARS Help Desk
boozallenstarshelpdesk@bah.com

You can also find additional tools and training resources related to STARS through
the SHIP National Technical Assistance Center (SHIP TA Center) at
https://www.shiphelp.org/.

The SHIP TA Center provides webinar training, technical assistance, and written
instructions for using STARS. Contact the SHIP TA Center STARS team at
stars@shiptacenter.org and 877-839-2675.

73

hjj

Uninsured
Some important tips when working with the uninsured:

 Some pharmacies waive or reduce co-pays for low-income individuals.
 Some hospitals offer programs and services to assist low-income
individuals.
 Community Health Centers accept sliding scale payment – based on
income.
 Free Rx samples may be available at the doctor’s office.

Additional Resources

AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP): To qualify, a person must be low-
income, uninsured, or underinsured with HIV/AIDS. In-state, call 1-800-542-2437
or 1-844-682-4058; out of state, call (518) 459-1641. Visit
https://www.health.ny.gov/diseases/aids/general/resources/adap/.

Accessia Health (formerly Patient Services Inc.): Helps pay for medication,
provides health insurance premium and copay assistance, navigates health
insurance plans, and provides legal advice for people who have been diagnosed
with chronic illnesses. To apply, call 1-800-366-7741 or visit
https://www.patientservicesinc.org/.

Community Health Advocates (CHA): This program is similar to HIICAP. CHA is
a great resource if you would like to refer a person, especially for those who do not
qualify for Medicare. Contact cha@cssny.org or 1-888-614-5400 or visit
www.communityhealthadvocates.org.

Federal Employee Health Benefit Program (FEHBP): FEHBP provides
assistance to federal employees, retirees, and covered family members. FEHBP
offers low-cost Rx with participating pharmacies only. To find out more information,
call 1-888-767-6738 or visit the following links:

 https://www.opm.gov/retirement-services/
 https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance/healthcare/
 https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance/Guide-Me/Retirees-
Survivors/#url=Health

GoodRx: Save up to 80% on prescription drugs at most U.S. pharmacies at 1-855-
268-2822 or visit https://www.goodrx.com/.

Great Expressions Dental Centers (formerly American Dental Centers): This is a
membership group. The annual fee includes two dental exams, two treatment
plans, x-rays up to full series (once a year) and cleaning/prophylaxis (one per
year). Other services are discounted. Must use their dental offices. Family rates
are available. Call 1-888-764-5380 or visit

74

hjj

https://www.greatexpressions.com/special-offers/spp-home.

Health Economics Group, Inc. Dental Network Card Program: Offers referral
services to dentists in specific areas who will accept lower fees as full payment for
people without dental insurance. To find out more information, call 1-800-666-6690
(outside the Greater Rochester area), 585-241-9500 (in the Greater Rochester
area), or https://www.hegpartners.com/dental.

The HealthWell Foundation: When health insurance is not enough, this
organization helps to fill the gap by assisting with drug copays, medical copays,
health insurance premiums, deductibles, coinsurance, and out-of-pocket
expenses. To find out if someone qualifies, call 1-800-675-8416.

LawHelp.Org/NY: Helps low-income New Yorkers solve legal problems such as
consumer debt, disability, housing, immigration, medical debt and taxes. More
information can be found at: https://www.lawhelpny.org/.

My Good Days (formerly Chronic Disease Fund): A national non-profit advocacy
organization that provides patient assistance and financial resources for lifesaving
and life-extending treatments to people in need. To find out more information, call
1-877-968-7233.

New York State Exchange (Marketplace): Quickly compare health plan options
and apply for assistance that could lower the cost of health insurance coverage for
working uninsured, uninsured sole proprietors and individual plans. A person may
also qualify for health care coverage from Medicaid or Child Health Plus through
the Marketplace. To find out more information, call 1-855-355-5777 or visit
http://www.nystateofhealth.ny.gov.

National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD): This medication assistance
program helps people obtain Rx they could not originally afford or that are not yet
on the market. Over 1,100 rare diseases are listed on NORD’s website. To apply,
call (800) 999-6673 or visit https://rarediseases.org/.

New York Rx Card: This option may save a person over 50% on an expensive
drug. No age or income limits. For more information, please visit
https://www.newyorkrxcard.com/ or call 1-800-931-2297.

Modest Needs: This program helps hard-working low-income households to afford
short-term emergency expenses. For more information, please visit
https://www.modestneeds.org or call 1-844-667-3776.

Patient Advocate Foundation Co-Pay Relief: Provides direct copayment
assistance for pharmaceutical products to insured Americans who financially and
medically qualify. To find out more information and to see if someone qualifies, call
1-866-512-3861.

Pfizer Medicines: Pfizer is a patient assistance program that makes locating

75

hjj

services more accessible. Through their Program Finder tool, uninsured and
underinsured patients who qualify can search for medicines free of charge or at a
savings and receive reimbursement services. To find out more information, call 1-
844-989-7284 or visit http://www.pfizerrxpathways.com/.

Pharmaceutical Company Patient Assistance Programs (PhRMA): Free or
heavily discounted Rx for limited duration (often 90 days). A person must have
internet access to search and can search by drug name, company or class. For a
directory of programs, contact 1-800-931-8691 or visit: www.rxassist.org,
https://www.myrxadvocate.com/, or http://www.needymeds.org/.

Rx Outreach: No age limit. No enrollment fees. Household income for 2022 must
be at or below 400% of the Federal Poverty Level. An individual must have an
annual income of $54,360 or less, and a couple must have an annual income of
$73,240 to be eligible. To find out more information, call 1-800-769-3880, 1-888-
796-1234 or http://rxoutreach.org/.

TRICARE: Military retiree program for people who have served for at least 20
years. Must be registered with Defense Enrollment. No enrollment fees and low-
cost Rx. To find out more information, call TRICARE East for NYS residents at 1-
800-444-5445 or for Rx benefits contact Express Scripts, Inc. at 1-877-363-1303.

VA Health Benefits Service Center: For assistance, veteran must have been
honorably discharged from the military, must enroll with VA and be seen by VA
doctor. To find out more information, call 1-877-222-8387 or visit
https://www.vets.gov/health-care/about-va-health-care/.

Vision Services (Low Cost) through the New York State Commission for the
Blind: Find information on programs for older adults at 1-866-871-3000 or visit
http://ocfs.ny.gov/main/cb/.

Lighthouse International: Worldwide organization dedicated to overcoming vision
impairment through rehabilitation, education, research, and advocacy. 1-800-284-
4422 or www.lighthouseguild.org.

Eyecare America: Provides eye exams and up to one year of care to U.S. citizens
and legal residents within the continental U.S., Hawaii and Puerto Rico through
volunteer ophthalmologists at no out-of-pocket cost to those who qualify.
1-877-887-6327, https://www.aao.org/eyecare-america.

New Eyes for the Needy: Purchases new prescription eyeglasses for children and
adults facing financial hardship who are living in the United States. 1-973-376-
4903, www.new-eyes.org.

76

hjj

Local Department of Social Services Offices
Albany County DSS – 518-447-7300 (Main number) 518-447-7492 (Medicaid)
162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12210

Allegany County DSS – 585-268-9622
7 Court St, Belmont, New York 14813-1077

Broome County DSS – 607-778-8850
36-42 Main St, Binghamton, New York 13905-3199

Cattaraugus County DSS – 716-373-8065
Cattaraugus County Building
1 Leo Moss Drive Suite 6010, Olean, New York 14760-1101

Cayuga County DSS – 315-253-1011
County Office Building, 160 Genesee St, Auburn, New York 13021-3433

Chautauqua County DSS – 716-661-8200
110 E. 4th Street, Jamestown, New York 14701

Chemung County DSS – 607-737-5302
425 Pennsylvania Avenue, Elmira, New York 14902

Chenango County DSS – 607-337-1500
5 Court Street and 14 West Park Place, Norwich, New York 13815

Clinton County DSS – 518-565-3300
13 Durkee St, Plattsburgh, New York 12901-2911

Columbia County DSS – 518-828-9411
25 Railroad Avenue, Hudson, New York 12534

Cortland County DSS – 607-753-5248
60 Central Avenue, Cortland, New York 13045-5590

Delaware County DSS – 607-832-5300
111 Main Street Suite 4, Delhi, New York 13753

Dutchess County DSS – 845-486-3000
60 Market St, Poughkeepsie, New York 12601-3299

Erie County DSS – 716-858-8000
95 Franklin Street, 8th Floor, Buffalo, New York 14202-3959

Essex County DSS – 518-873-3441
7551 Court Street, PO Box 217, Elizabethtown, New York 12932-0217
77

hjj

Franklin County DSS – 518-481-1888
184 Finney Blvd., Malone, New York 12953

Fulton County DSS – 518-736-5600
4 Daisy Lane, PO Box 549, Johnstown, New York 12095

Genesee County DSS – 585-344-2580
5130 East Main St, Batavia, New York 14020

Greene County DSS – 518-719-3700, 518-943-3200, or 1-877-794-9268
411 Main Street Suite 238, Catskill, New York 12414

Hamilton County DSS – 518-648-6131
139 White Birch Lane, PO Box 725, Indian Lake, New York 12842-0725

Herkimer County DSS – 315-867-1291
301 North Washington St, Suite 2110, Herkimer, New York 13350

Jefferson County DSS – 315-785-3000 or 315-782-9030
250 Arsenal Street, Watertown, New York 13601

Lewis County DSS – 315-376-5400
5274 Outer Stowe Street, PO Box 193, Lowville, New York 13367

Livingston County DSS – 585-243-7300
1 Murray Hill Drive, Mt. Morris, New York 14510-1699

Madison County DSS – 315-366-2211
133 North Court Street, Building 1, PO Box 637, Wampsville, New York 13163

Monroe County DSS – 585-753-6298, 585-753-6998, or 585-753-2750
111 Westfall Rd, Rochester, New York 14620-4686

Montgomery County DSS – 518-853-4646
County Office Building, 64 Broadway, PO Box 745, Fonda, New York 12068-0745

Nassau County DSS – 516-227-8519
60 Charles Lindbergh Blvd., Uniondale, New York 11553-3656

New York City – 718-557-1399
Human Resources Administration
150 Greenwich Street, New York, New York 10007

Niagara County DSS – 716-439-7600 or 716-278-8400
20 East Avenue, Lockport, New York 14094

78

hjj

Oneida County DSS – 315-798-5700
800 Park Avenue, Utica, New York 13501-2981

Onondaga County DSS – 315-435-2928
John H. Mulroy Civic Center, 421 Montgomery St, Syracuse, New York 13202-
2923

Ontario County DSS – 585-396-4060, (Outside County 1-877-814-6907)
3010 County Complex Drive, Canandaigua, New York 14424-1296

Orange County DSS – 845-291-4000
11 Quarry Road, Box Z, Goshen, New York 10924-0678

Orleans County DSS – 585-589-7000
14016 Route 31 West, Albion, New York 14411-9365

Oswego County DSS – 315-963-5000
100 Spring Street, Mexico, New York 13114

Otsego County DSS – 607-547-4355 or 607-547-1700
County Office Building, 197 Main St, Cooperstown, New York 13326-1196

Putnam County DSS – 845-808-1500
110 Old Route 6 #2, Carmel Hamlet, New York 10512-2110

Rensselaer County DSS – 518-266-7970
127 Bloomingrove Drive, Troy, New York 12180

Rockland County DSS – 845-364-3100 or 845-364-3040
50 Sanatorium Road, Building L, Pomona, New York 10970

Saratoga County DSS – 518-884-4140
152 West High St, Ballston Spa, New York 12020

Schenectady County DSS – 518-388-4470
797 Broadway, Schenectady, New York 12305-2704

Schoharie County DSS – 518-295-8334
County Office Building, 284 Main Street, 2nd Floor, PO Box 687, Schoharie, New York
12157

Schuyler County DSS – 607-535-8303
323 Owego St, Unit 3, Montour Falls, New York 14865

Seneca County DSS – 315-539-1800
1 DiPronio Drive, Waterloo, New York 13165-0690

79

hjj

St. Lawrence County DSS – 315-379-2111
6 Judson Street, Canton, New York 13617-1197

St. Regis Mohawk Tribe – 518-358-2272
71 Margaret Terrance Memorial Way, Akwesasne NY 13655

Steuben County DSS – 607-664-2000
3 East Pulteney Square, Bath, New York 14810

Suffolk County DSS – 631-854-9930 or 631-854-9700
3085 Veterans Memorial Highway, Ronkonkoma, New York 11779-8900

Sullivan County DSS – 845-292-0100
16 Community Lane, Liberty, New York 12754

Tioga County DSS – 607-687-8300 or 607-687-8302
1062 State Route 38, PO Box 240, Owego, New York 13827

Tompkins County DSS – 607-274-5680
320 West Martin Luther King/State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850

Ulster County DSS – 845-334-5000
1061 Development Court, Kingston, New York 12401-1959

Warren County DSS – 518-761-6300
Human Services Building, 1340 State Route 9, Lake George, New York 12845-
9803

Washington County DSS – 518-746-2300
Municipal Center, 383 Broadway, Building B, Fort Edward, New York 12828

Wayne County DSS – 315-946-4881
77 Water Street, PO Box 10, Lyons, New York 14489-0010

Westchester County DSS – 914-995-3333
112 East Post Road, 5th Floor, White Plains, New York 10601-4201

Wyoming County DSS – 585-786-8900
466 North Main Street, Warsaw, New York 14569-1080

Yates County DSS – 315-536-5183
County Office Building, 417 Liberty Street, Penn Yan, New York 14527-1118

80

hjj

The information provided by the Health Insurance Information, Counseling and
Assistance Program is intended for the sole purpose of educating consumers in
regard to the choices available for their health insurance needs. Particular
emphasis is placed on understanding original Medicare. Nothing herein is
intended, nor should it be construed, as an endorsement by the State of New York
of any specific insurance product or insurer.

81

Two Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12223-1251

Kathy Hochul, Governor
Greg Olsen, Acting Director

www.aging.ny.gov
