Michelle Baass | Director

DATE: December 30, 2025

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS Letter No.:25-30
ALL COUNTY WELFARE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
ALL COUNTY MEDI-CAL PROGRAM SPECIALISTS/LIAISONS
ALL COUNTY HEALTH EXECUTIVES
ALL COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH DIRECTORS
ALL COUNTY MEDS LIAISONS

SUBJECT: Work and Community Engagement Requirements for New Adult Group

Note: This ACWDL represents preliminary guidance and is subject to change based
on developing federal policy guidance and state legislative changes.

Purpose
The purpose of this All-County Welfare Director Letter (ACWDL) is for the Department of
Health Care Services (DHCS) to provide counties with policy guidance on the
implementation of work and community engagement requirements for the Modified
Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) New Adult Group as a result of recent federal legislation.
This preliminary ACWDL incorporates initial guidance from the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) and aligns with existing Medi-Cal policies. DHCS may update
this document if and when CMS issues additional guidance.

Background
On July 4, 2025, Section 71119 of H.R. 1, (Public Law 119-21) established Medicaid
(“Medi-Cal” in California) work and community engagement requirements for certain
individuals enrolled through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) adult expansion, effective
January 1, 2027. The MAGI New Adult Group (i.e. aid code M1), as prescribed in Section
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of the ACA, extends Medicaid eligibility to all adults aged 19 to 64,
including those without dependent children and parents with income over 109% but at
or below 138% of the federal poverty level (FPL). DHCS published Medi-Cal Eligibility
Division Information Letter (MEDIL) I 25-18, providing an overview of the H.R. 1
provisions affecting Medi-Cal.

To support implementation, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is
expected to issue an interim final rule by June 1, 2026, which will provide states with
California Department of Health Care Services State of California
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Gavin Newsom, Governor
1501 Capitol Avenue | Sacramento, CA | 95899-7413
MS 4607 | Phone (916) 552-9200 | www.dhcs.ca.gov California Health and Human Services Agency

Letter No.:25-30
Page 2
December 30, 2025

detailed operational guidance for implementing the work and community engagement
requirements. DHCS will issue additional policy instructions to counties as final federal
guidance is made available.

Policy
Effective January 1, 2027, individuals enrolled in the MAGI New Adult Group must
comply with federal work or community engagement requirements as a condition of
Medi-Cal eligibility unless they meet an allowable exemption or short-term hardship.

Counties will not assess work and community engagement requirements for MAGI New
Adult Group members with an application date of December 31, 2026, or prior until
their next scheduled renewal in 2027. Because the MAGI New Adult Group is also
subject to the six-month renewal requirement, DHCS will transition applicable Medi-Cal
members in this group from an annual to a six-month renewal cycle at the same time
(see MEDIL I25-18 for additional information). For example, if an individual’s renewal is
due in November 2027, they will be assessed for work and community engagement
requirements or exemptions as part of the renewal. If they continue to be eligible for the
MAGI New Adult Group, their renewal frequency will be updated to every six months
going forward for this member.

Work and community engagement requirements only apply to applicants and members
enrolled in Medi-Cal under the MAGI New Adult Group, regardless of immigration
status.

Excluded Populations
Members who receive Medi-Cal under other coverage groups such as Non-MAGI
(please refer to ACWDL 17-03 for a completed list of Non-MAGI programs), Mandatory
Children’s Group, or Pregnancy Group are excluded from work and community
engagement requirements. Additionally, individuals eligible for restricted-scope
(emergency) Medi-Cal or pregnancy services are also not subject to work and
community engagement requirements.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 3
December 30, 2025

As a reminder, Medi-Cal eligibility is determined at the individual level, as outlined in
ACWDL 16-16. Individuals subject to work and community engagement requirements
must be evaluated on an individual basis to determine whether they meet an exemption
or are participating in a qualifying work or community engagement activity. All
individuals must independently meet the participation criteria; one individual’s
compliance cannot be used to satisfy another’s requirement. If an individual does not
meet the required work or community engagement activities, only that individual’s
Medi-Cal eligibility will be impacted.

Example 1- Two-Adult Household Applying for Medi-Cal Where Neither Qualifies for an
Exemption

Applicant 1 lives in a household with their partner and applied for Medi-Cal on April 3,
2027. Both adults are subject to the work and community engagement requirements.
The county reviews the application and confirms that the partner is working full-time for
100 hours in March (look-back month), but Applicant 1 has not reported any qualifying
work or community engagement activities. Because compliance is assessed on an
individual basis, Applicant 1 cannot use their partner’s work hours to meet the
requirement. As a result, the county will follow the steps outlined in this ACWDL to issue
a Notice of Noncompliance and allow the applicant 30 calendar days to provide proof of
compliance or exemption.

Exemptions
The following populations are exempt from work and community engagement
requirements for a month if, for part or all of that month, they demonstrate community
engagement through one of the exemptions listed below.

Exemption Definition
Living in a county with high Living in a county with an unemployment
unemployment rate rate that is at or above the lesser of 8
percent, or 1.5 times the national
unemployment rate

Letter No.:25-30
Page 4
December 30, 2025

Exemption Definition
Entitled to, or enrolled in, beneﬁts under
Entitled to or enrolled in Medicare Parts
Medicare Part A of title XVIII or enrolled
A or B
for beneﬁts under Part B of title XVIII
• Indians or Urban Indians as defined
in the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act (IHCIA)
• California Indians as described in
American Indians or Alaska Natives
Section 809(a) of the IHCIA
(AI/AN)
• Individuals eligible for Indian Health
Service (IHS) under regulations by
the Secretary of Health and Human
Services
Parents, guardians, or caretaker relatives
(caretakers), or family caregivers (as
Parents, guardians, or caretaker relatives
defined in section 2 of the RAISE Family
(caretakers), or family caregivers of a
Caregivers Act (Public Law 115-119) of a
dependent child age 13 or younger
dependent child age 13 years of age and
under. Note: When there are two parents
in the household, both parents are eligible
for this exemption.
Pregnant or entitled to postpartum Pregnant or entitled to postpartum
medical assistance medical assistance
Former foster youth under age 26 Former foster care youth under age 26
Inmate of a local, state, or federal public
In jail or prison
institution
At any point during the 3-month period
Recently released from jail or prison in ending on the first day of such month, the
the last 90 days individual was an inmate of a local, state,
or federal public institution
Is a member of a household that receives
Meeting CalFresh work requirements supplemental nutrition assistance program
benefits under the Food and Nutrition Act

Letter No.:25-30
Page 5
December 30, 2025

Exemption Definition
of 2008 and is not exempt from a work
requirement under such Act
Meeting Temporary Assistance for In compliance with any requirements
Needy Families (TANF) work imposed by the State pursuant to section
requirements 407 of the Social Security Act
Parents, guardians, or caretaker relative
(caretaker), or family caregivers (as defined
Parent, guardian, caretake relative, or
in section 2 of the RAISE Family Caregivers
family caregiver of a disabled individual
Act (Public Law 115-119) of a disabled
individual of any age.
Veteran with a disability rated as total
Disabled veterans under section 1155 of title 38, United
States Code
Is participating in a drug addiction or
Participating in drug/alcohol treatment alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation
programs program as defined in section 3(h) of the
Food and Nutrition Act of 2008
• Blind or disabled (as defined in
section 1614);
• With a substance use disorder;
• With a disabling mental disorder;
Medically frail or otherwise has special • With a physical, intellectual, or
medical needs (as defined by the development disability that
Secretary), including an individual who is: significantly impairs their ability to
perform 1 or more activities of daily
living;
• With a serious or complex medical
condition;
• Or otherwise has special medical
needs (as defined by the Secretary)

Letter No.:25-30
Page 6
December 30, 2025

Exemption Definition
• Receiving inpatient hospital care,
nursing facility services in an
intermediate care facility for
individuals with intellectual
disabilities, inpatient psychiatric
hospital services, or such other
services of similar acuity (including
outpatient care relating to other
Exemptions for short-term hardship may services specified in this subclause)
also apply. Must be requested by the as the Secretary determines
individual appropriate;
• Such individual or their dependent
must travel outside of their
community for an extended period
of time to receive medical services
necessary to treat a serious or
complex medical condition that are
not available within their
community of residence
Lives in a county in which there exists an
emergency or disaster declared by the
Living in a county impacted by a President pursuant to the National
federally declared emergency or disaster Emergencies Act or the Robert T. Stafford
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance
Act

Additional guidance will be provided in a future policy letter regarding the definition of
exemptions.

Qualifying Work or Community Engagement Activities

Letter No.:25-30
Page 7
December 30, 2025

Individuals subject to the work and community engagement requirements as outlined
above who do not qualify for an exemption must meet one of the qualifying activities
outlined in the table below.

Criteria Definition
Income equivalent to at least 80 hours at
federal minimum wage (currently $7.25 An individual’s total gross income for a
per hour x 80 hours). Currently, this month must meet or exceed this amount
amount is $580 a month.
An individual whose gross income
Average monthly income of at least 80 (including earned income, unemployment
hours at federal minimum wage (currently benefits, State Disability Insurance,
$580 a month) for individuals with retirement income, dividends, etc.)
fluctuating income over a six-month fluctuates has an average monthly
period. income over the preceding 6 months that
meets or exceeds this amount.
Have a job (working at least 80 hours a
At least 80 hours of work
month) including self-employment.
Be in a job training program.

At least 80 hours of work program DHCS will provide additional guidance of
what constitutes a work program in a
future letter.
Do community service or volunteer work.

At least 80 hours of community service DHCS will provide additional guidance of
what constitutes community service in a
future letter.
• An institution of higher education
such as community college, state
college, or public or private
Go to school part-time or full-time
university.
• A program of career and technical
education (e.g., training or interning

Letter No.:25-30
Page 8
December 30, 2025

Criteria Definition
for trades like plumbing, carpentry,
electrical installations,
entrepreneurship, etc.)
Preparing for the General Educational
Development (GED) test or High School
Equivalency Test (HSET) or enrolled in an
Adult Literacy Program.
At least 80 hours of combined work, work
Do a mix of the things above
program, community service, or school

Gathering Work and Community Engagement Requirement Information at
Application and Renewal
DHCS is creating a Work and Community Engagement Requirement Application Insert
that counties will include as part of the application process to collect additional
information to assist counties in assessing work and community engagement
requirement status for applicants. DHCS is also updating the MAGI renewal form to
include work and community engagement requirement information, when applicable.
Coordinated changes will also be made to the California Healthcare Eligibility,
Enrollment, and Retention System (CalHEERS) consumer facing portal and BenefitsCal, in
both the application and renewal flows. As a reminder, applicants and members can
provide work and community engagement requirement information by phone, mail, in-
person, online, and through any other county available electronic sources.

As part of the application process, counties must first evaluate whether an applicant
qualifies for an exemption or short-term hardship exemptions before requesting
information about compliance with work and community engagement requirements.
Refer to the “Work and Community Engagement Requirement Procedures” section for
detailed guidance on how to assess for exemptions prior to requesting additional
information.

The Work and Community Engagement Requirement Application Insert is not required
to be submitted with the initial application. The county shall not delay processing the

Letter No.:25-30
Page 9
December 30, 2025

application, entering other application information into the California Statewide
Automated Welfare System (CalSAWS), or sending the necessary information to the
CalHEERS to conduct ex parte and make an initial eligibility determination when the
insert is not completed as the system may be able to identify the individual during ex
parte as excluded, exempt, or in compliance without the Work and Community
Engagement Requirement Application Insert (see Steps 1 and 2 under “Work and
Community Engagement Requirements Procedures,” below) and otherwise eligible.

DHCS will issue separate MEDILs to release the Work and Community Engagement
Requirement Application Insert, targeted for publication in early 2026, along with the
updated MAGI renewal form in English, all other 18 threshold languages, and in large
font.

Work and Community Engagement Requirements Compliance at Application
Look-Back Month
To determine whether an applicant or member has met the work and community
engagement requirement, counties shall review participation in qualifying work or
community activities during a defined look-back month. The purpose of this review is to
verify if the individual was engaged in work, training, volunteering, education, another
qualifying activity, or if the individual qualifies for an exemption that satisfies the work
and community engagement requirements. Additionally, the work and community
engagement requirements are only verified at application and six-month renewal.

For Medi-Cal applicants subject to the work and community engagement requirements
under Section 1902(xx) of the Social Security Act, counties must evaluate compliance or
exemption as part of the initial eligibility determination. The requirements apply to all
applicable individuals, as outlined above, unless the individual is exempt.

How to Verify Compliance
Counties shall verify compliance with the work and community engagement
requirement in the month immediately prior to the month of application (“look-back
month”). The applicant meets the requirement if they demonstrate participation in one

Letter No.:25-30
Page 10
December 30, 2025

or more qualifying activities, such as employment, community service, a work program
for the required minimum 80 hours, or have a monthly income of at least $580, or
enrollment in an educational program for at least half-time or more, during the look-
back month.

If the county cannot verify compliance or exemption at application, the county must
issue a Notice of Non-Compliance (NNC) in accordance with Section 1902(xx)(6)(A). The
purpose of the 30-day NNC period is to allow applicants an opportunity to demonstrate
they were already compliant during the applicable look-back month or that the
requirement does not apply due to an exemption. The NNC period is not intended as
additional time to satisfy the requirement after failing to meet it initially.

The NNC provides the applicant with 30 calendar days from the date of the notice to
submit verification demonstrating:

• Compliance with the requirement for the applicable look-back month, or
• Exemption from the work and community engagement requirements.

Counties shall not deny an application for non-compliance until the 30-day period
expires and the applicant has failed to make a satisfactory showing.

Applicants who provide satisfactory verification and meet the requirements or qualify for
an exemption within the 30-day period must be evaluated for eligibility effective the first
month in which all conditions of eligibility are met, consistent with 42 CFR 435.915.
If the applicant provides verification within the 30-day period showing compliance or
exemption, the county shall determine the first month in which all conditions were met
and set the Beginning Date of Aid accordingly. Applicants who become compliant in a
later month, while their application remains pending, do not need to reapply. Counties
must deny eligibility for any month in which the applicant did not meet or was not
exempt from the requirement. The county must update the case to reflect the verified
compliance and approve Medi-Cal effectively on the first day of the following month of
the month in which compliance began.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 11
December 30, 2025

Retroactive coverage prior to the month of compliance may not be granted unless
evidence demonstrates the individual was exempt during those prior months. Please
refer to the ‘Retroactive Medi-Cal’ section for additional information.

The county's delay in processing an application does not create eligibility for prior
months when the requirement was not met. Counties shall document in the case record
the date compliance or exemption was first achieved, the verification source, and the
effective date of eligibility.

Verification and Timing of Compliance Definitions
1. Look-Back Month
For applications, the look-back month is the calendar month immediately preceding
the month in which the eligibility determination is made.

2. Determination Month
If the applicant did not meet the work and community engagement requirement in
the look-back month but demonstrates compliance during the application month,
eligibility shall be established effectively the first day of the month following the
month in which compliance begins.

3. Exemption Determinations
When an applicant provides self-attestation or verification that they meet an
exemption, such as being medically frail, the exemption applies retroactively to the
date of application.

4. Future Compliance and Beginning Date of Aid
When an applicant becomes compliant after the application month but while the
application is still pending, the county shall not deny the application if all other
eligibility factors are met. Instead, the Beginning Date of Aid shall be the first day of
the month following the month in which the individual first meets the work and
community engagement requirements. The applicant is not eligible for months prior
to the month of compliance and must be denied for those months.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 12
December 30, 2025

Example: An individual applies in January but first meets the work and community
engagement requirement in March. The Beginning Date of Aid is April 1, and the
individual is ineligible for January, February, and March.

Example 1- Evidence of Work Activity or Exemption at Application

Applicant 1 applied for Medi-Cal on June 10. The county reviews their case and confirms
through pay stubs that Applicant 1 worked part-time during May and earns $600 a
month, the month before their application. Because Applicant 1 participated in
qualifying employment during the look-back month, they meet the work and
community engagement requirement at application and are approved for eligibility
effective June 1.

Example 2- No Evidence of Work Activity or Exemption at Application

Applicant 2 applied for Medi-Cal on January 15. The county reviews their case and finds
that Applicant 2 did not work or participate in any qualifying activity during December,
the month before their application. Applicant 2 also does not qualify for an exemption.
As a result, the county shall issue a Notice of Non-Compliance (NNC) giving the
applicant 30 days to provide proof of compliance or an exemption.

On February 14, the applicant submits verification showing enrollment in a qualifying
educational program at least half-time, beginning February 1. Because the application is
still pending and the applicant did not meet the requirement during the December
look-back month or the January application month, and only became compliant in
February, the county shall approve the application with a Beginning Date of Aid of
March 1 and deny eligibility for the months of January and February.

The applicant is ineligible for January and February. Coverage will begin March 1, the
month following the first month of verified compliance.

Example 3- Compliance Begins in the Application Month

Letter No.:25-30
Page 13
December 30, 2025

Applicant 3 applied for Medi-Cal on March 15. The county reviews their case and finds
that Applicant 3 submitted verification that they began attending school full-time on
March 8 and provided a sworn statement of their enrollment.

Although the look-back month (February) reflects non-compliance, the applicant
satisfied the requirement beginning in March. The county shall approve the application
with a Beginning Date of Aid of April 1, as the first month following the month in which
the condition of eligibility is met.

The applicant is ineligible for March.

Retroactive Medi-Cal
Effective January 1, 2027, for individuals in the MAGI New Adult Group, applicants may
request retroactive Medi-Cal coverage for up to one month prior to the month of
application. Individuals requesting retroactive Medi-Cal are required to complete and
submit the Supplement to Statement of Facts for Retroactive Coverage/Restoration
(MEDIL I14-27). To qualify for retroactive coverage under the work and community
engagement requirements, the individual must have either met the requirements or
qualified for an exemption during that retroactive month. Counties shall evaluate for
compliance or exemption status for the retroactive month using the same procedures
outlined in this ACWDL.

Work and Community Engagement Requirements at Six-Month Renewal
At the six-month renewal, the county must determine whether the individual met the
community engagement requirement in any one month since the last eligibility
determination. The look-back period for renewal includes all months after the last
determination and before the current renewal. Participation in one or more months
(which do not have to be consecutive) within this period is sufficient to meet the
requirement. When determining compliance at renewal, the county shall follow the
process outlined in the “Work and Community Engagement Requirement Procedures”
section below. If no exemption applies and no qualifying participation is found, the
county must provide the member with 30 calendar days to come into compliance.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 14
December 30, 2025

Example 1- Renewal, Recent Employment

Member 1’s Medi-Cal renewal is due in August. The county checks existing data and
finds that Member 1 worked part-time, resulting in an income of at least $580 in the
month of April only. Since Member 1 has been employed for one month and met the
income criteria within the current renewal period, the requirement for renewal is
considered met.

Work Requirement
Months Between Last and Community
Eligibility Engagement Met in
Determination the Lookback
Months?
February No
March No
April Yes
May No
June No
July No

Example 2- Renewal, Non-Consecutive Month

Member 2’s Medi-Cal was last renewed in February. At the next renewal in August, the
county verifies that Member 2 volunteered at a local community center in March and
May for 80 hours each of those months. Even though these months are not consecutive
with the renewal month, they fall within the period since the last determination. Member
2 meets the community engagement requirement for renewal.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 15
December 30, 2025

Work and
Community
Months Between Last
Engagement
Eligibility
Requirement Met in
Determination
the Lookback
Months?
February No
March Yes
April No
May Yes
June No
July No

Example 3- Renewal, No Recent Engagement

Member 3’s renewal is due in November. At the renewal in November, the county
determines that Member 3 does not qualify for an exemption and last worked in
January, before the last eligibility determination. Since there has been no qualifying
activity in the period between determinations, and the county has determined that
Member 3 does not meet an exemption, the county must engage Member 3 about
meeting the work and community engagement requirement.

Work and
Community
Months Between Last
Engagement
Eligibility
Requirement Met in
Determination
the Lookback
Months?
May No
June No
July No
August No
September No

Letter No.:25-30
Page 16
December 30, 2025

Work and
Community
Months Between Last
Engagement
Eligibility
Requirement Met in
Determination
the Lookback
Months?
October No

Work and Community Engagement Requirements Procedures
Counties shall conduct the following steps in chronological order to determine if
someone is subject to work and community engagement requirements and if they are
satisfying this requirement through an exemption or allowable work or community
engagement activity. This process shall be followed at application and renewal. Counties
shall not assess if someone is meeting the work and community engagement requirement
when they report a change in circumstance to the county. However, anyone newly
applying to an existing case must be assessed for work and community engagement
requirements and treated as a new applicant if they fall into the MAGI New Adult group.

As a reminder, a change in circumstance redetermination is an eligibility determination
completed by the county when the county receives information about a change to the
member’s circumstances that may affect a member’s eligibility for Medi-Cal benefits and
is not the same as an annual or six-month renewal. Refer to ACWDL 22-33 for more
information on change in circumstances.

If an individual is determined to be exempt, they are not subject to the work and
community engagement requirements. Counties shall ensure that individuals who
qualify for an exemption are not denied or discontinued from Medi-Cal based on non-
compliance with a requirement that does not apply to them.

Step 1 – Use information on the application, existing case file, renewal, or through
electronic sources to determine if the individual is excluded such as receiving Medi-Cal
under a group other than the MAGI New Adult Group (e.g. Non-MAGI) from the work and

Letter No.:25-30
Page 17
December 30, 2025

community engagement requirement mandate or meets one of the exemptions outlined
in this ACWDL.

Based on the information provided in the application or renewal, CalHEERS, CalSAWS,
and county eligibility workers must determine if someone meets any of the following
through the ex parte process prior to contacting the applicant or member for additional
information:
• Is in another coverage group other than the MAGI New Adult Group.
• Living in a county with a high unemployment rate
• Entitled to Medicare Parts A or B
• American Indian or Alaska Native
• Parent, guardian, or caretaker relative of a dependent child age 13 and younger
• Pregnant or entitled to postpartum medical assistance
• Foster Youth or Former Foster Youth under age 26
• Inmate
• Recently released inmate of a public institution
• Meeting CalFresh work requirements
• Meeting TANF work requirements
• Parents, guardians, caretaker relative (caretaker) or family caregiver of a disabled
individual
• Disabled veterans
• Participating in drug/alcohol treatment programs
• Medically frail
• Exemptions for short-term hardship
• Living in a county impacted by a federally declared emergency or disaster

When someone meets one of the exemptions listed above, they are not subject to the
work and community engagement requirements during this eligibility period, and the
case file should be updated to reflect this status. The list above is in hierarchical order.
When an individual meets more than one reason on the list, the county shall use the first
reason identified based on the hierarchy without pursuing any further work and
community engagement requirement assessment during this eligibility determination. It

Letter No.:25-30
Page 18
December 30, 2025

is important to note that systems will apply an exemption based on electronic sources
even if the member does not report this information on the application or renewal.
When exemption information is verified through electronic sources, counties shall accept
this information without requesting additional documentation from the member. There
may be times when work and community engagement requirements are verified
electronically, but additional verifications for other eligibility factors, such as income, are
still required. Counties should follow existing policies for eligibility processes outside of
the work and community engagement requirements. Refer to ACWDL 22-33 for detailed
information on the ex parte review and use of available electronic data sources.
Additionally, if electronic verification shows the individual met these requirements in the
month immediately before the application month, counties shall accept that verification,
even if a later request for other eligibility factors, such as income, indicates the
individual may no longer be working or meeting sufficient hours.

DHCS will add additional data sources as part of the ex parte review to confirm work
and community engagement exemptions. These sources will include claims data,
members eligible to a waiver (which includes Home and Community-Based Services
waiver programs), and enrollment in DHCS benefits or other programs that could
reasonably indicate that an individual meets a medical exemption or other exemption
such as caring for a young child or a family member who is disabled. DHCS will release
an additional letter regarding new data sources and their usage in the future.

Step 2 – If no exclusion or exemption is apparent, use information on the application,
existing case file, renewal, or through electronic sources to determine if they are
participating in a work or community engagement activity outlined in this ACWDL.
Based on the information provided in the application or renewal, CalHEERS, CalSAWS,
and county eligibility workers will identify if someone who is subject to the work and
community engagement requirement is participating in a qualifying activity that satisfies
this requirement through an ex parte process prior to contacting the applicant or
member for additional information.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 19
December 30, 2025

When someone is meeting a qualifying activity or a combination of activities and the
information can be verified through electronic sources, no additional information is
needed from the individual to meet work and community engagement requirements, even
if the Work and Community Engagement Requirement Application Insert was not
submitted or the work and community engagement requirement section on the MAGI
renewal form is not updated.

Applications and renewals where all information, including work and community
engagement requirements, can be verified electronically will continue through the
automated process. Counties should follow existing policies for eligibility processes
outside of work and community engagement requirements.

DHCS will add additional data sources as part of the ex parte review to confirm work
and community engagement activities. These sources will include additional income
verification services such as Equifax. DHCS will release an additional letter regarding new
data sources and their usage in the future.

Step 3 – Request additional information when needed

When it does not appear that the individual qualifies for an exemption, nor meets the
work and community engagement requirement, or when available information cannot
verify compliance, counties shall request additional information from the applicant or
member.

Counties must provide individuals with 30 calendar days to:
1. Submit information supporting an allowable exemption or short-term hardship.
2. Submit proof or verify that they meet the work and community engagement
requirement through participation in one or more qualifying work or community
engagement activities.
3. Newly participate in one or more qualifying activities and provide proof of new
employment or enrollment.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 20
December 30, 2025

Counties are required to make two separate contact attempts at both application and
renewal when additional information is needed about work and community
engagement requirements. Counties are encouraged to use multiple contact methods
such as text message, email, phone calls, and through the mail to reach members
regarding this requirement. Refer to ACWDL 22-12 and 22-33 for detailed information
regarding the second contact process.

DHCS is developing outreach materials for county use when requesting additional work
and community engagement requirement information. DHCS will provide additional
guidance in a future letter regarding the use of outreach materials, acceptable forms of
verifications, county responsibilities to support individuals meeting work or community
engagement activities, and application of good cause when additional time is needed to
provide verifications.

Step 4 – Apply a negative action to deny or discontinue eligibility when non-compliance is
determined.

If, after completing the steps outlined above, the county determines that an individual
subject to the work and community engagement requirement does not qualify for an
exemption and has not met the requirement through participation in one or more
qualifying activities, the county must first evaluate the individual’s eligibility for all other
Medi-Cal programs that are not subjected to work and community engagement
requirements. Please refer to ACWDL 17-03 for more information on the application of
the Medi-Cal hierarchy.

If the individual does not qualify under any other basis, counties shall issue a notice of
action, allowing a minimum of 10 days’ notice for existing Medi-Cal members, when an
individual is discontinued or denied due to noncompliance with work and community
engagement requirements. CalSAWS and CalHEERS are establishing a new negative
action reason for discontinuances and application denials due to work and community
engagement requirements. The county must document this action in the case file.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 21
December 30, 2025

DHCS is developing a new negative action notice of action snippet specific to work and
community engagement requirements, which will be released in a subsequent letter and
will include policy direction on its use. Existing Medi-Cal members who cannot meet the
work and community engagement requirement may return to coverage without a new
application during the 90-day cure period once they provide information demonstrating
compliance with the requirement. After the 90-day cure period, they can re-apply for
Medi-Cal at any time.

Note: Individuals who are eligible for MAGI Medi-Cal but fail to meet the work and
community engagement requirements due to noncompliance will not be eligible for
subsidized coverage through Covered California, even if they meet all other Medi-Cal
requirements. In these circumstances, the individual will be evaluated for all other Medi-
Cal programs.

Members Moving Out of the MAGI New Adult Group
When a member moves from the MAGI New Adult Group to any Medi-Cal coverage
group that is not subject to work and community engagement requirements, the county
shall stop applying the work and community engagement requirement as of the
effective date of the eligibility determination. No further assessment or verification
related to work and community engagement is required while the individual remains
eligible in the new coverage group. The county shall update the case file to reflect the
change in eligibility group and that the individual is no longer subject to work and
community engagement requirements and send the appropriate noticing to the
member. If the individual later returns to the MAGI New Adult Group, the county shall
defer the work and community engagement requirement assessment until the next
scheduled renewal, at which time the procedures in this ACWDL apply.

Example 1
Member 1 is enrolled in the MAGI New Adult Group and has a child in the home over
the age of 13. Member 1 reports a decrease in income that makes them qualified for the
Parent/Caretaker Group effective May 1. As of May 1, the county stops applying work
and community engagement requirements. In September, Member 1 begins receiving

Letter No.:25-30
Page 22
December 30, 2025

unemployment and is over the income limits for the Parent/Caretaker Group and returns
to the MAGI New Adult Group. The member’s renewal is due in January. The county
defers the work and community engagement requirement assessment until the January
renewal and follows the processes outlined in this ACWDL.

Example 2
Member 2 is enrolled in the MAGI New Adult Group and reports to the county that they
have a disability on October 3. Member 2 has not yet received a disability determination
from the Social Security Administration (SSA) and requests to be evaluated for Non-
MAGI Medi-Cal. The county begins the disability evaluation process while Member 2
remains in the MAGI New Adult Group, as all other eligibility requirements are met.
Work and community engagement requirements continue to apply during this period.
On October 5, the individual is found eligible for a Non-MAGI program. The county will
transition Member 2 to the appropriate Non-MAGI aid code, stop applying work and
community engagement requirements, and send the appropriate noticing to the
member.

Members Moving into the MAGI New Adult Group
When an individual moves from a Medi-Cal coverage group that is not subject to work
and community engagement requirements into the MAGI New Adult Group, the county
shall not conduct an immediate work and community engagement requirement
assessment at the time of the transition unless it is part of the member’s renewal. The
member will continue to follow their original annual renewal date. Please see ACWDL
25-31 for additional guidance on setting the renewal date when moving in and out of
the MAGI new adult group.

During the next renewal, the county must first evaluate the individual for Transitional
Medi-Cal (TMC) eligibility, consistent with ACWDL 21-27. If the individual is not eligible
for TMC, the county shall determine whether the individual meets a work and
community engagement requirement exemption or is participating in a qualifying
activity, consistent with the procedures in this ACWDL. This policy applies to all

Letter No.:25-30
Page 23
December 30, 2025

transitions into the MAGI New Adult Group, including those due to age, income change,
or household composition change.

Example 1
Member 1 moves from a pregnancy aid code to the MAGI New Adult Group after the
12-month postpartum period ends in August. The member’s next renewal is in February.
The county does not assess work and community engagement requirements at the time
of the transition in August, but completes the assessment at the February renewal and
follows the processes outlined in this ACWDL.

Example 2
Member 2 turns 19 on October 25 and transitions from a child aid code to the MAGI
New Adult Group. The renewal is due in April. The county does not assess work and
community engagement requirements at the time of the transition in October but
completes the assessment at the April renewal and follows the processes outlined in this
ACWDL.

Example 3
Member 3 moves from a parent/caretaker relative aid code to the MAGI New Adult
Group in July, when the member’s only child turns 14 on July 13, and Member 1 no
longer qualifies for the parent/caretaker relative aid code. The member’s next renewal is
in January. The county does not assess work and community engagement requirements
at the time of the transition in July but completes the assessment at the January renewal
and follows the processes outlined in this ACWDL.

Newly Reported Pregnancy or End of Pregnancy
When an individual reports a pregnancy or the birth of a child or other termination of a
pregnancy, the individual becomes immediately exempt from the work and community
engagement requirement for the duration of the pregnancy and for 12 months
following the end of the pregnancy, regardless of the outcome. The county shall update
the case to reflect the exemption upon the report that there is or was a pregnancy so

Letter No.:25-30
Page 24
December 30, 2025

that the work and community engagement requirements are not applied during this
period.

When a pregnancy is newly reported for a member in the MAGI New Adult Group aid
code, CalHEERS will retain the MAGI New Adult Group aid code throughout the
pregnancy and postpartum period, and the exemption will be applied within that aid
code. In some cases, the individual may transition from the MAGI New Adult Group to a
pregnancy or postpartum aid code.

If this occurs, when the postpartum period ends, if the individual transitions back to the
MAGI New Adult Group, the county shall defer the work and community engagement
requirement assessment until the member’s next scheduled renewal and then apply the
procedures in this ACWDL. Medi-Cal members will be informed of their eligibility status
through the standard Notice of Action (NOA) process.

Example 1
Member 1 reports a pregnancy on February 17. Member 1 is exempt from work and
community engagement requirements through 12 months postpartum. Member 1
returns to the MAGI New Adult Group on November 1 of the following year. The
renewal is due in February, so the county defers the work and community engagement
requirement assessment until the February renewal.

Intercounty Transfers
When a member subject to work and community engagement requirements moves
from one county to another and requests an intercounty transfer, the receiving county
shall accept the member’s current eligibility status, including any verified exemption or
work activities, without interruption. If the member has already met the work and
community engagement requirement or is exempt during the existing renewal period,
the requirement is considered met for the remainder of that period. The receiving
county shall not reevaluate work and community engagement requirements until the
next regularly scheduled renewal. Counties shall follow the intercounty transfer CalSAWS
protocols to ensure the member’s case is transferred accurately and without a break in

Letter No.:25-30
Page 25
December 30, 2025

coverage. DHCS will issue further guidance on ICTs for individuals transitioning between
counties that qualify for the high-unemployment rate exemption in the future.

Example 1
Member 1 met the work requirement in May and June. On June 15 Member 1 moves
from Sacramento County to Sonoma County and requests an intercounty transfer.
Sonoma County accepts the case and continues eligibility without reassessing work and
community engagement requirements until the scheduled renewal.

Member Outreach
Through a collaborative and multi-layered approach, DHCS will ensure Medi-Cal
members receive the information and support they need to prepare for upcoming
changes while maintaining access to care. No later than July 2026, DHCS will notify
members who may be subject to work and community engagement requirements.
Member communications will include information on who is subject to the
requirements, available exemptions, resources to find community engagement
opportunities, and the criteria for meeting the requirement. In addition to direct mail,
DHCS will use a variety of communication channels including text messaging, websites,
flyers, social media, and direct outreach by managed care plans and community partners
to educate members about the new work and community engagement requirements.

Additional information about DHCS’s comprehensive outreach and engagement plan
will be provided to counties in a future MEDIL.

Notice of Action Updates
DHCS is updating the Medi-Cal Notice of Action (NOA) language to align with new work
and community engagement requirements, as well as the six-month redetermination
requirement. The revised NOA language will reflect the work and community
engagement requirement for impacted Medi-Cal members. DHCS will issue a separate
MEDIL to release the NOA snippets in English, all other 18 threshold languages, and in
large font.

Letter No.:25-30
Page 26
December 30, 2025

System Readiness
DHCS will complete and implement all system changes necessary to implement work
and community engagement requirements in CalSAWS and CalHEERS by release date
R26.9, to be ready by January 1, 2027. DHCS is working with CalSAWS and CalHEERS to
align system functionality based on the policy outlined in this letter.

Pending Federal Guidance and Future Clarifications
While this letter outlines current procedures and requirements for implementing work
and community engagement policies, DHCS is awaiting additional federal guidance
from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) on several key policy areas
related to the implementation of work and community engagement requirements.
These areas include:
• The definition of “medically frail,”
• Standards for self-attestation,
• Acceptable forms of verification,
• Criteria for exemptions and work activities,
• Accelerated Enrollment, and
• Additional operation guidance for administering the work and community
engagement requirements.

DHCS will issue further clarification and policy direction on these topics through future
ACWDL and MEDILs once federal guidance is received.

If you have any questions, or if we can provide further information regarding this policy
guidance, please contact MCED-Policy@dhcs.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Sarah Crow, Chief
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division
Department of Health Care Services
