How Do I?

Get home delivered meals

Find a nutrition or exercise class

Digital Resources

Apply for Medi-Cal

Get help with Medicare

Determine the best housing option for me

Get help with my landlord

Get legal assistance

Make home modifications so that I can safely stay in my current home

Get help dealing with memory problems

Learn more about hearing, vision, and speech assistive technology

Get transportation to appointments

Learn more about safe senior driving

Get paid to take care of a family member

Open an Adult Day Care Center

Report elder abuse or neglect

Outside California

Call 1-800-677-1116

Eldercare Locator

For information on services for seniors or adults with disabilities who live outside California.

State Health Insurance Assistance Programs (SHIP)

For one-on-one insurance counseling and assistance to Medicare beneficiaries, their families, friends, and caregivers.

Medicare Counseling (HICAP)

How To Find Services In My Area

To learn more about Medicare Click Here

You can locate a HICAP office in your area by selecting your county on the Find Services in My County page of this website or by calling 1-800-434-0222.

What Services Are Available

Wondering how to sign up for Medicare now that you are almost 65?

Confused about all the different parts to Medicare—do you need A, B, C, D?

Have questions on prescription drug coverage, co-pays, or eligibility rules?

Need help filing an appeal or challenging a denial?

Considering long-term care insurance?

Need a speaker for a community education event?

HICAP (Health Insurance Counseling and Advocacy Program) provides free, confidential one-on-one counseling, education, and assistance to individuals and their families on Medicare, Long-Term Care insurance,
other health insurance related issues, and planning ahead for Long-Term Care needs. HICAP also provides legal assistance or legal referrals in dealing with Medicare or Long-Term Care insurance related issues.

HICAP counselors are trained in Medi-Cal and Medicare and can help you understand the complex insurance options to find the best fit for you. You can also learn about Medicare or Medi-Cal by attending
community presentations or conferences conducted by HICAP counselors.

Who Can Get These Services

Counseling is provided to:

Persons 65 years of age or older and are eligible for Medicare

Persons younger than age 65 years of age with a disability and are eligible for Medicare

Persons soon to be eligible for Medicare

Education events are available for individuals of any age

Program Data

For past and current program data visit the Data and Reports sections of the website.
