State Buy-in Data Exchange Processes
Chapter 2
Table of Contents
(Rev. 4, 08-21-20)

Transmittals for Chapter 2
2.0 Introduction

2.1 Overview of State Buy-in Data Exchange

2.2 Frequency of State-CMS File Exchange
2.2.1 State Input Files
2.2.2 CMS Response to States (CMS Billing and Response Files)

2.3 Data Exchange Between CMS and SSA

2.4 Federal Resources for States to Support Buy-in and Medicaid Operations
2.4.1 CMS Data Systems for States
2.4.1.1 Territories and States Beneficiary Query (TBQ) File
2.4.1.2 Enrollment Database (EDB) File
2.4.1.3 Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug System User Interface
(MARx UI)
2.4.1.4 Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act
(MMA) File Exchange
2.4.1.5 Table of CMS Files That Provide Data on Medicare Eligibility
2.4.2 SSA Data Systems for States
2.4.2.1 State Verification and Exchange System (SVES)
2.4.2.2 State Online Query (SOLQ)
2.4.2.3 Beneficiary and Earnings Data Exchange (BENDEX)
2.4.2.4 State Data Exchange (SDX)
2.4.2.5 Low-Income Subsidy (LIS)
2.4.2.6 Table of SSA-State Data Exchanges

2.5 Accretions
2.5.1 Part B Buy-in Accretions
2.5.1.1 Part B Buy-in for Cash Assistance Recipients (SSI/SSPs)
2.5.1.1.1 Auto-Accrete States and States with Federal
Administration of SSPs
2.5.1.1.2 Alert States
2.5.1.2 Members of the Buy-in Coverage Group Who Do Not Receive
Cash Assistance
2.5.2 Part A Buy-in Accretions

2.5.3 Important Processing Rules for MSP Accretions
2.5.3.1 Required Steps for QMB, SLMB, and QI Part B Buy-in Accretions
2.5.3.2 Part B Before Part A Rule for QMB Accretions
2.5.3.3 Part A Buy-in State v. Group Payer State Status
2.5.4 CMS Adjustment of State Accretion Effective Date to Coincide with
Medicare Entitlement Data

2.6 Deletions
2.6.1 State-Initiated Deletions
2.6.1.1 Medicare Parts A and B Deletions Based on Loss of Buy-in
Coverage
2.6.1.2 Special Procedures for an Individual Who Loses SSI
2.6.1.3 CMS Processing of Part B Deletions Because a Beneficiary is No
Longer a Member of the State’s Coverage Group
2.6.1.4 CMS Processing of State-Initiated Part A Deletion Requests Based
on Loss of QMB Status
2.6.2 CMS-Initiated Deletions
2.6.2.1 Death of the Beneficiary
2.6.2.2 Beneficiary’s Loss of Medicare Eligibility
2.6.2.3 Beneficiary Changes of State of Residency
2.6.2.4 Deletion as a Result of Another State's Accretion Action
2.6.2.5 Change of State Residence for SSI Recipients
2.6.2.6 Beneficiary Becomes Entitled to Reduced or Premium-Free Part A
2.6.2.7 Deletions from Other Sources

2.7 Changes and Corrections
2.7.1 State Correction of a Previously Submitted State Accretion or Deletion Date
2.7.1.1 Adjustment to the Start Date for Ongoing (Code 41) Billing Items
2.7.1.2 Adjustment of Accretion or Deletion Date - Closed Period of State
Buy-in Coverage
2.7.2 State Request for Adjustment of SSI Actions Accreted by CMS
2.7.3 State-Initiated Change Records
2.7.3.1 Medicare Part B
2.7.3.2 Medicare Part A
2.7.4 CMS Reply to a State-Initiated Change Record (Code 99)

2.8 SSA-Initiated Accretions - Public Welfare Accretion Procedure (Code 1167)

2.9 Erroneous PW Accretion - All States

2.10 Enrollment of Persons Who Refuse to Establish Medicare Eligibility

2.11 State Accretion Procedure to Establish a Closed Period of State Buy-in Coverage
2.11.1 Medicare Part B
2.11.2 Medicare Part A

2.0 Introduction
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

State buy-in of Medicare premiums operates through a data exchange process among
states, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and the Social Security
Administration (SSA).

This chapter describes:
• The buy-in data exchange processes involving states, CMS, and SSA;
• State and CMS processes to start (“accrete”), change, and end (“delete”) buy-in
enrollment; and
• CMS buy-in system processing rules and tips for states.
Chapter 3 contains buy-in file exchange layouts, and chapter 4 contains CMS system
code definitions.

NOTE: This chapter contains links to the SSA Program Operations Manual System
(POMS) and information on SSA data exchange applications as of July 2020. 1
2.1 Overview of State Buy-in Data Exchange
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

States submit buy-in files to CMS’ Third Party System (TPS) to identify individuals dually
eligible for Medicare and Medicaid for whom the state will pay Part A and/or B
premiums. In turn, TPS responds to state submissions with response files and a monthly
billing file.

On a daily basis, TPS updates the CMS Enrollment Database (EDB) to record all state
Medicaid recipients enrolled in, or being enrolled in, Medicare due to state buy-in. The
EDB is the CMS authoritative source for Medicare enrollment information including
demographic information, enrollment dates, state buy-in information, and Medicare
managed care enrollment for all Medicare beneficiaries.

On a daily basis, TPS and EDB exchange data directly with SSA systems for storage in
the Master Beneficiary Record (MBR), SSA’s database that records Medicare and Social
Security eligibility determinations and enrollment data. This CMS-SSA daily exchange
may trigger updates to beneficiary data concerning buy-in enrollment, Medicare
entitlement, and premium billing in either or both systems.

States can obtain information to support state buy-in operations and Medicaid eligibility
and enrollment processes by querying these SSA and CMS databases in a variety of ways
as described in section 2.4.

1 As a courtesy to states, CMS provides links to the SSA POMS and other online SSA materials as of the
time the manual was published. Changes may occur after release. For more information visit ssa.gov.

2.2 - Frequency of State-CMS File Exchange
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

CMS encourages states to exchange buy-in data with TPS on a daily basis. Through
March 2022, states can send input files to TPS as frequently as each business day (daily)
and opt to receive one monthly response file or to receive daily response files, in addition
to the monthly billing file.

Daily state-CMS buy-in exchange promotes efficiencies for states and allows
beneficiaries to more quickly enroll in Medicare Part A and/or B, or stop paying
Medicare premiums if they are already enrolled and had been paying them on their own.

Starting April 1, 2022, federal regulations at 42 CFR §§ 406.26 and 407.40 require all
states to submit and receive buy-in files on a daily basis. See the Interoperability and
Patient Access final rule (CMS-9115-F), 85 Federal Register 25510 (May 1, 2020).

NOTE: States transitioning to daily receipt of CMS buy-in files should contact the
MAPD Help Desk at mapdhelp@cms.hhs.gov to schedule the update. CMS may need to
limit the number of states at any given time transitioning to receiving daily buy-in files
given impacts to CMS systems.

For CMS technical assistance to help shift to daily receipt of buy-in files, states can
contact the CMS Office of Financial Management (OFM)/Accounting Management
Group (AMG)/Division of Premium Billing and Collections (DPBC) through the DPBC
resource mailbox at DPBCStateBuy-In@cms.hhs.gov.

Unlike the shift to daily receipt of CMS buy-in files, a state’s shift to sending daily buy-in
files involves no federal system changes. States can, therefore, start to send daily files to
CMS at any time.

2.2.1- State Input Files
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Each state submits the buy-in input file to TPS through an electronic file transfer (EFT)
exchange setup. The state’s input file includes a record for each Medicare beneficiary
for whom the Medicaid agency is accreting, deleting, or changing buy-in status and the
state responsible for paying the Part A or B premiums.

In response, CMS returns an updated transaction record that provides data identifying,
for each transaction on the state input file, whether CMS accepted, modified, or rejected
it, as well as a Part A or Part B billing record showing the state’s premium
responsibility.

In addition, CMS may “push” new updates obtained from SSA to the state, for example,
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) determinations or changes in the Health Insurance

Claim Number (HICN).

NOTE: The HICN or RRB claim numbers are preferred for state buy-in exchanges. CMS
will accept the MBI, but will return only the HICN (or, for RRB beneficiaries, the
converted RRB claim number, also known as pseudo HICN) on state buy-in response
files.

See chapter 3 for further details on CMS/state data exchange.

2.2.2 - CMS Response to States (CMS Billing and Response Files)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

All states receive Part A and Part B monthly billing files from CMS containing all new
and ongoing credit/debit billing records. In states that receive only monthly exchange
files from CMS, CMS sends a monthly billing file containing all billing records and reply
records, reflecting state, CMS, and SSA information received through the last business
day of the month. In daily exchange states, CMS sends daily response files (or, as
frequently as the state submits the input file), containing only reply records; the CMS
monthly file includes only billing records.
CMS will process each state input file on a flow basis, in the order they are received, by
adding them to the input processing lineup for the next scheduled daily update run of
TPS.

The CMS reply records for state accretions and deletions will be one of the following
types:
An acknowledgement reply that TPS has accepted the accretion or deletion action, found
in daily response files only;
• A billing reply indicating the liability charges or refund resulting from an
accepted accretion or deletion action, found in monthly response files
only;
• A reject reply code describing the reason for the rejected accretion or
deletion action; or
• An adjustment reply if CMS changes the date of the state transaction.

TPS responses are differentiated by a Record Identification Code (RIC) value of A
through F, each identifying a type of response. Chapter 3 contains a detailed description
of the format for each RIC type included on daily response files and the monthly billing
file.
RIC-A SSI Alert

RIC-B Monthly Billing Records

RIC-C Medicare Number Change Record

RIC-D Date Change or Reply Record

RIC-E Personal Characteristics Change Record

RIC-F Reject Record

2.3 - Data Exchange Between CMS and SSA
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The Combined Exchange Record (CER) file daily exchange process between CMS and
SSA eligibility systems is another integral part of buy-in data exchange.

Through CER file processing, CMS receives from SSA Medicare Part A and/or B
entitlement dates, SSI and disability determinations, and demographic data. Once TPS
completes its daily update of the EDB to reflect new state accretions, deletions, and
changes, TPS also sends these update notifications to SSA systems for storage in its MBR
database. CMS does so through its daily TPS Update Notification File transmission to
SSA. If SSA systems receive and accept the records, the MBR will reflect updated
enrollment information (e.g., newly enrolling buy-in coverage group members in
Medicare Parts A or B) and trigger downstream premium billing actions (e.g., starting or
stopping premium withholding and direct billing; issuing credits or debits for the
beneficiary). SSA systems send MBR data on updated or new entitlement via the CER file
to the EDB, which in turn updates the entitlement record.

In addition to state-initiated buy-in transactions, SSA may transmit data that causes CMS
to perform buy-in actions for states. When the MBR is updated to reflect new or modified
beneficiary information received by other parts of SSA, the SSA systems share these MBR
updates with the EDB. For example, once SSA makes an SSI determination, SSA systems
will share this information with the EDB via the CER file, and TPS will auto-accrete the
beneficiary to Part B buy-in in an auto-accrete state or send an alert notification on
behalf of the beneficiary to an alert state. See section 2.5.1.1 for more information about
accretions for SSI individuals.

NOTE: When SSA’s automated system cannot accept a buy-in record from CMS,
Medicare entitlement will not update to the MBR. In these instances, SSA systems will
generate a processing limitation/exception or return a deletion record to CMS. Both
instances will require administrative (manual) action by CMS and/or SSA to correct.

Discrepancies between the EDB and MBR are common in these cases. For example, TPS
will continue to bill states for Part A and/or Part B premiums even if a beneficiary record
does not yet show Medicare entitlement and/or may show beneficiary premium liability
amounts (i.e., the record shows SSA deduction or direct billing status). If any of these

situations are identified, the state should submit a resolution request to CMS’ Offices of
Hearings and Inquiries (OHI), Division of Medicare System Exceptions and Interfaces
(DMSEI) for assistance (see chapter 6, section 6.2).

2.4 - Federal Resources for States to Support Buy-in and Medicaid
Operations
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

States have a number of options to query an individual’s HICN/MBI and Medicare
entitlement status in CMS or SSA systems, or SSI status in SSA systems, in order to help
the state correct and re-submit the buy-in accretion.

2.4.1 - CMS Data Systems for States
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.4.1.1 - Territories and States Beneficiary Query (TBQ) File
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The TBQ File supports a query process that includes Medicare Parts A, B, C, and D
eligibility and enrollment data on the queried beneficiaries. States and territories may
query CMS daily for Medicare beneficiary eligibility determinations. For additional
information about your state’s TBQ File, visit the CMS TBQ page at
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare-Medicaid-Coordination/Medicare-and-Medicaid-
Coordination/Medicare-Medicaid-Coordination-
Office/DataStatisticalResources/TerritoryBeneficiaryQuery.

2.4.1.2 - Enrollment Database (EDB) File
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The EDB File supports a query process that includes Medicare Parts A and B eligibility
and enrollment data on the queried beneficiaries. States and territories may query CMS
daily for Medicare beneficiary eligibility determination. Note that CMS is not expanding
access to new states; CMS will provide new states access to the TBQ. 2 For additional
questions about your state’s EDB File, contact the State Data Resource Center (SDRC)
at http://statedataresourcecenter.com/.

2 CMS. (2019). Data Disclosures and Data Use Agreements: States. Retrieved from
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Files-for-Order/Data-
Disclosures-Data-Agreements/States.html.

2.4.1.3 - Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug System User Interface
(MARx UI)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The MARx UI system provides individual beneficiary look-up where users can find real-
time data about a beneficiary who is enrolled in a Medicare Advantage and/or
Prescription Drug plan, either currently, in the past, or in the future. Data fields include
demographic data, Medicare Parts A and Part B Entitlement, Non-Entitlement,
Enrollment, and Disenrollment codes, Low-Income Subsidy (LIS) status, and detailed
health plan enrollment information at a beneficiary level. For information about
accessing and using the MARx UI system, see the MAPD State User Guide at
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/CMS-Information-
Technology/mapdhelpdesk/Downloads/MAPD-State-User-Guide-Version-80.pdf. Note
that data are only available for individuals enrolled in a Medicare plan; if they are not,
the end-user will not find them in MARx and will need to check a different CMS system.
For help, contact the MAPD Help Desk at mapdhelp@cms.hhs.gov or 1-800-927-8069;
for more information about the MAPD Help Desk, visit their website at
http://go.cms.gov/mapdhelpdesk.

2.4.1.4 - Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization
Act (MMA) File Exchange3
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The MMA File Exchange is the state’s data exchange with CMS in which the state
provides current information on updated full-benefit dually eligible and partial-benefit
dually eligible beneficiary status (i.e., those who get Medicaid help with Medicare
premiums, and often for cost-sharing), and CMS provides a response file with Medicare
Parts A, B, C, and D enrollment and eligibility information. This is an operational
exchange, but states may find information on the CMS response file useful for
researching and trouble-shooting rejected records. For information about the MMA File
Exchange, visit the CMS MMA page at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare-Medicaid-
Coordination/Medicare-and-Medicaid-Coordination/Medicare-Medicaid-Coordination-
Office/DataStatisticalResources/StateMMAFile.html.

Information about the MMA File Exchange, TBQ File, and/or EDB File can also be
found at Understanding CMS Data: An Overview of EDB, MMA, and TBQ Files on the
SDRC 4 website at

3 The “MMA file” is named after the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of
2003, and is also referred to as the “State Phasedown file.”
4 In 2011, CMS established the SDRC to provide states with support, assistance, and guidance on how to
request, access, and use Medicare data provided by CMS to support their dually eligible beneficiaries. The
SDRC team consists of data experts who provide states with information and resources to help support
their use of Medicare data for Medicare–Medicaid care coordination and program integrity purposes.

https://statedataresourcecenter.com/assets/files/Task12_Overview_Edited_SDRC_MMC
O_Final508.pdf.

For technical help with the MMA File Exchange, MARx UI, TBQ File, and/or EDB File,
contact the MAPD Help Desk at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-
Systems/CMS-Information-Technology/mapdhelpdesk/index or reference the MAPD State
User Guide at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/CMS-
Information-Technology/mapdhelpdesk/Downloads/MAPD-State-User-Guide-Version-
80.pdf.

For questions regarding your CMS data agreement, status of exchanges and queries for
your state/territory, or understanding the data in these files, contact SDRC at
http://statedataresourcecenter.com/.

Section 2.4.1.5 provides further detail on the information provided in each file to help
states identify Medicare eligibility within their population.

2.4.1.5 - Table of CMS Files That Provide Data on Medicare Eligibility
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

File Element MMA EDB TBQ MARx UI

Beneficiary
Yes Yes Yes Yes
Name

Beneficiary Mailing and
No Mailing Yes
Address residence

Date of Birth Yes Yes Yes Yes

States can locate SDRC resources on the SDRC website
(http://www.StateDataResourceCenter.com), submit questions by phone at (877) 657-9889, or by
email at SDRC@EconometricaInc.com.

File Element MMA EDB TBQ MARx UI

MBI only

NOTE: CMS has
created an MBI
HICN, Plan lookup tool in
HICN, MBI,
HICN, MBI, SSN MBI, HICN, MBI, SSN MARx that provides
SSN
SSN authorized users the
ability to obtain an
individual
beneficiary’s MBI. 5

Part A Yes Yes Yes Yes

Part B Yes Yes Yes Yes

Part C Yes No Yes Yes

Part D Yes No Yes Yes

Date of No Yes No Yes
Disability

Dual Qualified Medicare No QMBs, SLMBs,
Eligibility Beneficiaries QIs, and other full-
Status (QMBs), Specified benefit dually
Low-Income eligible
Medicare beneficiaries.
Beneficiaries
(SLMBs), Qualifying
Individuals (QIs),
and other full-benefit
dually eligible
beneficiaries.

5 See the HPMS memo of May 19, 2020, on “Medicare Beneficiary Identifier (MBI) Plan Lookup Tool,”
available at: https://www.cms.gov/files/document/mbi-lookup-tool.pdf.

2.4.2 - SSA Data Systems for States
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

In addition to querying CMS data systems for correct HICN/MBI information, states can
also query SSA systems. These queries include SSN verification and benefit information
for Title II (Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI)) and Title XVI (SSI) of
the Social Security Act (“the Act”), which can be used to support states’ buy-in
operations. Section 2.4.2.6 identifies the relevant SSA data exchanges, in the event a
state prefers to leverage them. See SSA POMS GN 03314.155 at
https://secure.ssa.gov/apps10/poms.nsf/lnx/0203314155.

2.4.2.1 - State Verification and Exchange System (SVES)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

SVES is a batch query system that provides states and some federal agencies with a
standardized method of SSN verification and uniform data response for Title II (OASDI)
and Title XVI (SSI) of the Act. SVES also allows states to request information from other
SSA exchange systems external to SVES (e.g., Beneficiary and Earnings Data Exchange
(BENDEX), State Data Exchange (SDX)) via the SVES request.

SVES utilizes SSA’s File Transfer Management System (CyberFusion) to receive and
transmit files. States and, in some cases, federal agencies transmit files containing
requests to SSA. SVES filters the files and routes the requests to the proper applications
(e.g., BENDEX, SDX) for processing. For more details, see SSA’s State Verification and
Exchange System (SVES) and State Online Query (SOLQ) Manual at
https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/sves_solq_manual.pdf.

2.4.2.2 - State Online Query (SOLQ)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

SOLQ is an online version of SVES and allows states real-time access to SSA’s SSN
verification service and retrieval of OASDI or SSI data. For a full list of SOLQ/SOLQ-I
record data elements, see Appendix J of SSA’s State Verification and Exchange System
(SVES) and State Online Query (SOLQ) Manual at
https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/sves_solq_manual.pdf. The manual also
provides guidelines for requesting data from other SSA data exchange applications
including BENDEX/Beneficiary Earnings Exchange Record (BEER) records, SDX
records, prisoner data records, and 40 qualifying quarters records. In addition, the
manual provides information about how states can obtain citizenship data to administer
health care programs.

2.4.2.3 - Beneficiary and Earnings Data Exchange (BENDEX)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

BENDEX is a batch data exchange from SSA that provides OASDI and earnings data to
state agencies. BENDEX data is retrieved from the MBR. The primary purpose of the
BENDEX is to assist states in administering the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) program and their Medicaid programs.

BENDEX contains only those records on which the state has requested data exchange as
a result of direct input by the state or as a by-product of a state buy-in action.

The BENDEX file provides OASDI benefit payment status, SSI payment status (if
applicable), and Medicare enrollment dates (if applicable).

For more details, see the SSA’s list of BENDEX data elements at
https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/Bendex%20record.pdf.

2.4.2.4 - State Data Exchange (SDX)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

SDX is a batch data exchange that provides SSI data to states that administer federally
funded income or health maintenance programs. The SDX is created by SSA from the SSI
record. The primary purpose of the SDX is to assist the states in administering Medicaid
and State Supplemental Programs (SSPs).

SDX contains a record of all persons within the state who are eligible for the basic
federal SSI payment or a federally-administered state supplement. It provides a method
of identifying people who may be eligible for state buy-in. However, there is no
indication of whether the individual has established eligibility for Medicare.

SDX also identifies all individuals who lose SSI regardless of whether they are on state
buy-in. Loss of SSI constitutes a change in circumstances that may affect an individual’s
Medicaid eligibility and thus requires a redetermination. See 42 CFR § 435.916(d). See
section 2.6.1.2 for more information about procedures when an individual loses SSI.

For more details, see the SDX record data elements at
https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/SDX%20record.pdf

2.4.2.5 - Low-Income Subsidy (LIS)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Federal law requires SSA to transmit files containing data from LIS applications to

states, and for states to use the data to initiate Medicare Savings Program (MSP)
applications. States must treat the LIS “leads” data as an application for the MSP, as if
it had been submitted directly by the applicant, even if SSA denied the applicant’s LIS
application. See sections 1144(c)(3) and 1935(a)(4) of the Act.

SSA sends daily files containing LIS application data and eligibility determinations to
state Medicaid agencies. The files contain data for all LIS applications received, with
limited exceptions. See SSA POMS HI 00815.024 at
https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0600815024 for information about these exceptions.
SSA LIS leads data files contain information about beneficiaries’ LIS eligibility, as well
as demographic, income, and resource information verified by SSA.

For more details, see SSA’s list of LIS record data elements at
https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/LIS%20record.pdf.

2.4.2.6 - Table of SSA-State Data Exchanges
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Data Type Description Manual/Data Elements
Exchange

State Batch SVES draws SVES/SOLQ Manual
Verification query upon (https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/sve
and BENDEX, s_solq_manual.pdf)
Exchange SDX,
System prisoner
(SVES) data, and 40
qualifying
quarters
data.

State Online Individual Online See above.
Query query version of
(SOLQ) SVES which
allows states
real-time
access to
SSA’s SSN
verification
service and
retrieval of
OASDI or
SSI data.

Data Type Description Manual/Data Elements
Exchange

State Data Batch Eligibility SDX record data elements
Exchange query data for the (https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/SD
(SDX) basic federal X%20record.pdf)
SSI payment
or federally-
administered
SSPs. It
provides a
method of
identifying
people who
may be
eligible for
state buy-in.

Beneficiary Batch OASDI BENDEX data elements
and query benefit (https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/Be
Earnings payment ndex%20record.pdf)
Data status, SSI
Exchange payment
(BENDEX) status, and
Medicare
enrollment
dates. Data
retrieved
from MBR.

LIS Leads Daily file LIS LIS record data elements at
Data from SSA application https://www.ssa.gov/dataexchange/documents/LIS
to state data and %20record.pdf.
Medicaid eligibility
agencies determinatio
ns.

2.5 - Accretions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.5.1 - Part B Buy-in Accretions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Each state is responsible for ensuring Part B buy-in enrollment for members of the buy-in
coverage group identified in the state’s buy-in agreement. CMS will generally initiate
Part B buy-in enrollments for SSI eligible individuals residing in states with signed 1634
agreements, referred to as “SSI auto-accrete” states. Auto-accrete states make all buy-in
eligibility determinations for non-SSI recipients and submit state accretion requests
directly to CMS. Alert states are responsible for all buy-in eligibility determinations (i.e.,
for both SSI and non-SSI) and submit accretion requests directly to CMS. In limited
circumstances, SSA can take steps to initiate Part B buy-in through the Public Welfare
(PW) Accretion process for individuals who file a Medicare application and appear to
qualify for Part B buy-in. See section 2.8.

2.5.1.1 - Part B Buy-in for Cash Assistance Recipients (SSI/SSPs)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

SSA explores Medicare eligibility for all SSI (including federally-administered SSPs)
applicants. 6

Through the daily CER file exchange, SSA notifies CMS about individuals who are
entitled to SSI and found eligible for Medicare. CMS systems follow up with one of two
actions.
In auto-accrete states, CMS systems will automatically accrete the individual to Part B
buy-in and transmit an auto-accretion code to the state (code 1180).

NOTE: In auto-accrete states, an internal SSA process called the Medicare Attainment
and Leads Process (MALP) identifies current SSI (and federally-administered SSPs)
recipients for Medicare screening as they approach their 65th birthday. These
individuals:

• Must be within three months of the attainment of age 65, provided the SSI record
is annotated to reflect that the individual has submitted proof of age (which meets
the Title II proof of age requirements); and,
• Must have submitted proof of U.S. citizenship or proof that he/she has been
lawfully admitted for permanent residence and has resided in the United States
continuously for five years.

See SSA POMS HI 00810.010 at https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0600810010.

6 SSA explores eligibility for all possible benefits, including Medicare, under the SSI applicant’s SSN (this
includes exploring under the SSN of a spouse, former spouse, or parent, etc.). SSA POMS SI
00601.060.D.2.i at https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0500601060#d.

In alert states, CMS systems will transmit an SSI alert that a beneficiary in its jurisdiction
is entitled to SSI benefits and may be eligible for buy-in (code 86bb).

2.5.1.1.1 - Auto-Accrete States and States with Federal Administration of
SSPs
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

When CMS receives a record for an individual entitled to SSI (and/or federally-
administered SSPs), TPS will auto-enroll the individual in Part B buy-in.

The effective date of the accretion will be the first month/year of the most recent
continuous period the individual is entitled to SSI (and/orfederally-administered SSPs),
entitled to Medicare, and a resident of the state. 7 CMS generates auto-accretions at any
time of the year, without regard to Medicare enrollment periods or premium increases
for late enrollment.

Systems Tip: CMS notifies states of Part B auto-accretions with transaction code 1180 in
the monthly billing file (RIC-B) sent to states (or in the daily response files, RIC-D, sent
to daily exchange states). The following month, the record will appear as an ongoing
item (code 41) unless the item is deleted.

NOTE: States are responsible for ensuring that all eligible individuals are enrolled in
buy-in. Although CMS auto-accretes SSI (federally-administered SSPs) recipients in
auto-accrete states, auto-accretion may omit SSI beneficiaries in limited instances.
States should review SSA records (i.e., SVES/SOLQ, SDX, or BENDEX) to identify SSI
recipients and other covered members and submit needed transactions to CMS. A state-
initiated SSI accretion code 61 or code 63 is processed in the same manner as any other
state-initiated accretion.
In addition, SSA can initiate Part B buy-in through the PW accretion process when an
individual files a new Medicare application. See SSA POMS HI 00815.030 at
https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0600815030 and section 2.8 for more information
about PW accretions.

7 Pursuant to the court decision in NY State v. Sebelius (N.D. NY, June 22, 2009), available at
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCOURTS-nynd-1_07-cv-
01003/pdf/USCOURTS-nynd-1_07-cv-01003-0.pdf, CMS has in effect a policy under which
states are granted states equitable relief from the imposition of retroactive Part B premiums in certain
instances involving lengthy delays in Medicare eligibility determinations to the extent that such delays
would result in retroactive auto-accretions that would cover periods for which it is too late to obtain the
benefits of Medicare coverage.

2.5.1.1.2 - Alert States
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Alert states are responsible for accreting all SSI (SSPs) individuals in Part B buy-in if the
state finds them eligible for a buy-in coverage group as part of a Medicaid eligibility
determination.

To assist states with the identification of SSI recipients who are also eligible for
Medicare, CMS sends SSI accretion alert records to states. CMS generates such SSI
accretion alert notifications once it is notified by SSA that the SSI individual qualifies for
Medicare and may be eligible for a buy-in coverage group. States can also use
information transmitted through SSA systems (i.e., SVES/SOLQ, SDX, or BENDEX) to
identify SSI recipients for the purpose of Medicaid eligibility determinations.

If the state determines that a Medicare-eligible individual is also eligible for a buy-in
coverage group, it must submit a state accretion request to CMS. The effective date of
the accretion will be the first month of buy-in eligibility based upon the SSI/SSPs effective
date.

Systems Tip: SSI accretion alert records (RIC-A) contain a Part B transaction (code 86).
Once an alert state determines an SSI recipient eligible for a Part B buy-in coverage
group, the state can accrete the individual to Part B buy-in (generally, code 84).

2.5.1.2 - Members of the Buy-in Coverage Group Who Do Not Receive
Cash Assistance
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

States must initiate Part B buy-in accretions for any member of the buy-in coverage
group who does not receive cash assistance.

The effective date of the accretion will be based on the start date of the buy-in period,
which differs depending upon the Medicaid eligibility category. See chapter 1, section
1.13 and chapter 1, appendix 1.C. States can submit a Part B buy-in accretion and
establish Medicare entitlement at any time of the year, without regard to Medicare
enrollment periods or premium increases for late enrollment if the individual is already
enrolled in Part A or Part B. Once TPS shares the new accretion record with the MBR,
the MBR will update the Medicare enrollment record.
The buy-in effective date is the first month the individual is eligible for buy-in. See
chapter 1, appendix 1.C for more information about the effective dates for buy-in.

Systems Tip: Common codes used by states
• Code 61 - state accretion action;
• Code 63 - identical to code 61 but used for special accretion actions or
monitoring specific coverage groups;

• Code 84 - used by an alert state to accrete a beneficiary to Part B buy-in in
response to a code 86 accretion alert record or by an auto-accrete state to
accrete a beneficiary based on an examination of the SDX file.

See chapter 4 for detailed buy-in transaction code descriptions.

2.5.2 - Part A Buy-in Accretions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

States may accrete QMB-eligible beneficiaries to their Part A buy-in rolls through a buy-
in agreement or a group payer arrangement. For information about these options, see
chapter 1, section 1.7 and chapter 2, section 2.5.3.3.

States pay Part A premiums for Qualified Disabled Working Individuals (QDWIs) only
through the group payer arrangement. States may only cover Part A premiums for
QDWIs; however, the individuals must be enrolled in Part B prior to the state accreting
the record to their buy-in account. For more information about QDWIs, see chapter 1,
section 1.6.2.

Each state is responsible for accreting individuals determined eligible for QMB or
QDWI. CMS does not accrete beneficiaries to Part A buy-in except when requested to do
so by the state in conjunction with a buy-in problem resolution request. See chapter 6.

For any accretion, the latest acceptable effective date a state may submit is one month
prior to the current billing period. The accretion effective date may not be equal to or
later than the current billing period. The current billing period is equal to the calendar
month in which the accretion is processed plus two months. For example, any action
processed in April is part of the June billing period. The latest accretion effective date a
state may submit within the June billing period is May. Any accretion with an effective
date of June submitted during the June billing period will be rejected. In other words, for
any accretion processed in April (i.e., in the June billing period), the latest acceptable
effective date a state may submit is May.

Systems Tip: States use accretion codes 61 and 63 for routine Part A accretions. The
Buy-in Eligibility Code (BIEC) is not required for Part A billing records. States may
submit a BIEC for Part A accretions and CMS will store the value in the beneficiary’s
EDB record; CMS, however, will not return a Part A BIEC reply.

NOTE: The Part A accretion BIEC will not update the Part B BIEC stored on the EDB.

2.5.3 - Important Processing Rules for MSP Accretions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.5.3.1 - Required Steps for QMB, SLMB, and QI Part B Buy-in
Accretions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

To ensure a Part B accretion for a QMB, SLMB, or QI successfully updates through TPS,
states should leave the Buy-in Eligibility Code (BIEC) blank in the initial state accretion.
If the state buy-in system requires a BIEC code, states should use another code besides
“P,” “L,” or “U” to avoid triggering a rejection.

The state can add the appropriate BIEC to the billing record by using the code 99 update
process. CMS encourages states to verify Part B buy-in is present in CMS systems before
submitting the code 99. A code 99 action will always update prospectively. States
cannot change a BIEC for a past period through the buy-in data exchange.

CMS will return a Part A or Part B code 21XX series rejection, or sub-code C rejection
record in reply to state accretion requests if the state accretion request includes the BIEC
identifier. See chapter 4, section 4.7.1, for a description of the code 21XX rejection
series.

NOTE: If a state determines an individual eligible for QMB-plus or SLMB-plus, Part B
buy-in begins the earlier of the buy-in effective date applicable to the Medicaid or MSP
categories. For QMB-plus individuals determined eligible at application, the separate
full-benefit Medicaid coverage may be effective up to three months before the month of
application, if the individual received Medicaid covered services and would have been
eligible at the time the services were received, even though the same retroactive
eligibility period does not apply to their QMB benefits. See 42 CFR § 435.915(a) and
chapter 1, section 1.13.1. TPS will accept retroactive start dates for the Part B buy-in
accretion as long as the BIEC identifier in the transaction is blank.

2.5.3.2 - Part B Before Part A Rule for QMB Accretions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

TPS will not accept a state’s request for a Part A accretion unless the EDB shows
current Medicare Part A and Part B entitlement and open buy-in coverage. That is, if a
state determines an individual eligible for QMB, the state or CMS must first accrete Part
B before the state can accrete Part A. States may submit Part A and Part B accretions
simultaneously in the same month or first submit a Part B accretion followed by a Part A
accretion. The exception to this rule applies to QDWIs for which the state only pays
premiums for Part A. TPS cannot accept a Part A accretion for QDWI records unless the
EDB shows current Part B entitlement, but the beneficiary, not the state, is liable for the
Part B premiums.

NOTE: TPS automatically sorts buy-in files so Part B actions process before Part A. To
safeguard against TPS rejections for Part A and/or Part B, ensure the Part B accretion

requests do not include the BIEC identifier.

2.5.3.3 - Part A Buy-in State v. Group Payer State Status
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The state’s payment arrangement status (i.e., Part A buy-in state or Part A group payer
state) determines when a state can enroll QMB-eligible individuals in Medicare Part A.
This status will also determine if the state will pay applicable surcharge amounts due to
late enrollments or re-enrollments.

A Part A buy-in state can enroll a QMB individual in Part A buy-in at any time of year.
If the individual is already enrolled in Part B and Part B buy-in is open, TPS will accept
a state Part A buy-in accretion request. If the QMB individual lacks Parts A and B, the
individual must first apply for Premium-Part A (conditionally or unconditionally) and for
Part B at SSA before the state can submit the accretion to TPS. SSA will process the
Premium-Part A enrollment without regard to Medicare enrollment periods and without
premium increases for late enrollment.

A group payer state is limited in when it can enroll a QMB in Part A buy-in. The
individual must first file a conditional or unconditional Part A application (and enroll in
Part B if they are not already enrolled) during the General Enrollment Period (GEP)
(January through March; coverage will be effective July 1). The code Z99 on the MBR
represents conditional enrollment.

The effective date associated with the code Z99 is July 1. Once the state determines the
individual eligible for QMB, it can submit the accretion request with an effective date of
July 1 at the earliest. If premium surcharge amounts for late enrollment apply, CMS will
bill the state for them.

See chapter 1, section 1.11 for more information.

2.5.4 - CMS Adjustment of State Accretion Effective Date to Coincide with
Medicare Entitlement Data
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

All state-initiated accretion actions are screened against the EDB for the presence of
Medicare entitlement. In those cases where entitlement exists, TPS compares the
beneficiary’s Medicare entitlement date established by SSA with the state buy-in effective
date. If the state buy-in effective date precedes the individual’s Medicare entitlement
date, TPS will automatically adjust the state buy-in date to agree with the individual’s
Medicare entitlement date. For Part A accretions, the accretion cannot be earlier than
both the Medicare Part B entitlement date on the EDB and the Part A entitlement or
conditional enrollment (Z99) date.

NOTE: Conditional Part A enrollment data are used by CMS in deriving Part A buy-in
start dates, but do not appear in CMS response files. See chapter 4, section 4.7.1,
transaction code 21XX, sub-code C.

Systems Tip: The state will receive two reply records as a result of the adjustment to the
state-submitted start date. The first record (code 30XX) will contain the effective date as
submitted by the state. The second record will contain the adjusted effective date that
corresponds to the individual’s Medicare entitlement date. The transaction code in this
record can be any one of the possible reply codes for a state-submitted accretion.

Example: The state-initiated accretion record contains a state buy-in effective date of
03/2017. When the accretion is screened, CMS will examine the Medicare entitlement
date. In this example, the EDB Medicare entitlement date is 04/2017.

The state will receive two reply records for this situation. The first record will be a code
30XX. This record will contain the state buy-in effective date of 3/2017 submitted by the
state. The second record will be a code 1161. The state buy-in effective date contained
in this record will be 04/2017.

2.6 - Deletions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.6.1 - State-Initiated Deletions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.6.1.1 - Medicare Parts A and B Deletions Based on Loss of Buy-in
Coverage
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

States should submit deletion actions promptly when the state determines the individual is
no longer eligible for buy-in due to loss of membership in the buy-in coverage group.
See sections 2.1.6.3 and 2.1.6.4 for guidance on how the end date is applied for a state
deletion request.

Systems Tip: states use code 51 - state deletion record for a beneficiary who is no longer
a member of the state’s coverage group - to delete a record from the state’s account.
A state’s deletion record will be rejected if:

• The deletion date is blank, incomplete, or otherwise in error.
• The deletion date, other than a death deletion, is equal to or greater than the
billing month.
• The deletion date for a death deletion is later than the current (update) month.

NOTE: See section 2.9 for information about state deletions for PW accretions.

2.6.1.2 - Special Procedures for an Individual Who Loses SSI
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

If a beneficiary loses SSI, a state must conduct a Medicaid redetermination to assess
whether or not the individual qualifies for a different Medicaid category, including those
encompassed by the state’s buy-in coverage group.

CMS transmits an informational “SSI deletion alert” notification record (code 87) to
auto-accrete and alert states upon notification from SSA that a beneficiary has lost SSI
eligibility.

The alert is not a notification that CMS has deleted the record or that the state must
submit a deletion transaction. Rather, the alert is intended to prompt the state to conduct
a redetermination. While the state is making this determination, the state must maintain
Medicaid coverage and must not terminate the individual from buy-in. If the state
determines the individual eligible for another Medicaid category in the buy-in coverage
group, the state should maintain buy-in coverage for the individual. States shall not
delete individuals from buy-in unless the state redetermination finds the individual no
longer qualifies as a member of the buy-in coverage group. See chapter 1, section 1.4
for more information about redeterminations.

Systems Tip: If the state redetermination finds the individual no longer eligible as a
member of the buy-in coverage group, the state should delete the individual using code
51. If the state redetermination shows the individual qualifies under another Medicaid
category in the buy-in coverage group, the state should not submit a code 51 deletion.
Instead, the state should submit a code 99 (change record) to change the BIEC in the
state’s billing record using the steps described in chapter 4.

2.6.1.3 - CMS Processing of Part B Deletions Because a Beneficiary is No
Longer a Member of the State’s Coverage Group
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

CMS will evaluate the requested stop date of all state deletion requests for Part B (code
51 and, in some cases, code 50) based on loss of buy-in coverage group membership (this
does not apply to code 53) and, where necessary, modify the deletion effective date based
on the processing limitations below.

• The deletion regulations for Part B buy-in limit the retroactivity of Part B
deletions to the CMS processing month minus two months. See 42 CFR §
407.48(c). This rule aims to prevent excessive hardship for beneficiaries when

buy-in coverage ends by restricting retroactive liability to two months.8

NOTE: In practice, SSA may initially bill beneficiaries for premium liability
amounts of up to three months (current month plus two retroactive billing months)
when buy-in coverage ends. The deletion regulation is also known as the
“Commissioner’s Decision” (CD) because it was issued in 1972 by SSA’s
commissioner, before the creation of its sister-agency, the Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA, now CMS).

• CMS operates in alignment with SSA’s Current Operating Month (COM)
schedule, rather than by calendar month. COM dates vary each month and are
determined by SSA. The COM dates provide the start and end dates for
processing periods/months. For example, the August 2020 9 COM ran from July
24 through August 25. The September 2020 COM ran from August 26 through
September 23.
CMS, in order to maintain synchronicity with SSA, processes code 51 deletions according
to the business day prior to the COM change date. This is necessary because the TPS
daily exchange with SSA is not processed by SSA until the next business day.

Systems Tip: CMS sends a copy of SSA’s COM schedule to states on a quarterly basis to
help the states determine the earliest deletion date.

NOTE: The deletion cut-off of the 25th day of the month in 42 CFR § 407.48(c) no longer
applies; SSA’s COM schedule should be referenced, instead.

The date of CMS processing depends upon the time of day received. Generally, TPS
update processing begins at 11:00 a.m. (Eastern Time (ET))--and no earlier--every
business day. Files received before daily processing begins are processed the same day.
Processing may be delayed on rare occasions. Files received after daily processing
begins (usually 11:00 a.m. ET) are processed in the next scheduled TPS daily run.

Example: State code 51 deletion requests are received in the calendar month of August
2020. The TPS August 2020 COM is from July 24 through August 25, and the TPS
September 2020 COM is from August 26 through September 23. TPS processing starts at
11:00 a.m. ET.

State code 51 deletion requests received by TPS in August 2020 prior to 11:00 a.m. ET
on the 25th had a processing month of August and may have an effective deletion date no
earlier than June. If the state requested an effective date prior to June, CMS adjusted the

8 The retroactive liability may not extend to a point in time prior to the date of action in the notice which
informed the beneficiary of their loss of Part B buy-in coverage through the Medicaid program. See 42
CFR 431.201, 435.917, 431.206, and 431.210 to 214.
9 Note: these dates are specific to 2020, and provided as illustrative examples. The specific dates will vary
by calendar year.

deletion date, processing it as June (i.e., if the state requested an effective date of April,
TPS automatically adjusted the effective date to June). The state remained liable for
billing prior to and including June. CMS refunded the state for any premiums already
billed for July through September (CMS bills one month prospective to the date the
billing invoice is mailed) and the beneficiary became liable for those months. 10

State code 51 deletion requests processed by TPS on or after August 26 (regardless of the
time of day), had a processing month of September and an effective deletion date no
earlier than July 2020. If the state requested an effective date prior to July, TPS
automatically adjusted the deletion date, processing it as July (e.g., if the state requested
an effective date of April, TPS automatically adjusted the effective date to July). The
state remained liable for billing prior to, and including, July 2020. CMS refunded the
state for any premiums already billed for August through September (CMS bills one
month prospectively) and the beneficiary became liable for those months.

2.6.1.4 - CMS Processing of State-Initiated Part A Deletion Requests
Based on Loss of QMB Status
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The state must notify CMS through a Part A deletion request when an individual loses
eligibility for QMB. Part A buy-in ends at the end of the month the deletion is processed,
regardless of the date the individual lost QMB status. See 42 CFR § 406.26. Actions
received on the last business day of a month are processed the next month. CMS will
evaluate the requested effective date of all state Part A deletions and modify the deletion
effective date based on these two rules.

Examples:

State Part A deletion requests received in August prior to 11:00 a.m. ET on the 31st may
have an effective deletion date no earlier than August. If the state requests an effective
date prior to August, CMS will adjust the deletion date, processing it as August (e.g., if
the state requests an effective date of July, TPS automatically adjusts the effective date to
August). The state remains liable for billing prior to and including August. CMS will
refund the state for any premiums already billed for September (CMS bills one month
prospectively) and the beneficiary becomes liable for that month.

State Part A deletion requests received in August after 11:00 a.m. ET on the 31st may be
held until September. Those held until September may have an effective deletion date no

10 Note: CMS does not automatically bill the beneficiary for those months; instead, CMS notifies SSA. SSA
may begin withholding the monthly premium from the person’s benefits; if they do not, SSA would notify
CMS to begin direct billing of the individual.

earlier than September. If the state requests an effective date prior to September, TPS
will automatically adjust the deletion date, processing it as September (e.g., if the state
requested an effective date of August, TPS automatically adjusted the effective date to
September). The state remains liable for billing prior to and including September. CMS
will refund the state for any premiums already billed for October (CMS bills one month
prospectively) and the beneficiary is liable for that month.

2.6.2 - CMS-Initiated Deletions
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

CMS will initiate a deletion action to terminate ongoing buy-in coverage or annul
(“wipe-out”) the entire buy-in coverage period in response to certain events. This
section describes events that will cause CMS to delete ongoing buy-in billing records
from a state’s account.

2.6.2.1 - Death of the Beneficiary
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

SSA receives reports of death from a number of sources in the daily operation of its
various programs. CMS receives death notifications in the CER file exchange with SSA,
which will first trigger an update to the EDB, and then to TPS, to end buy-in coverage.
CMS will delete the beneficiary from buy-in effective the last day of the beneficiary’s
month of death. In cases where the date of death is prior to the buy-in start date, the
state will receive credit for the entire buy-in period.

Systems Tip: CMS sends code 16bb, notification of death, to the state on the next monthly
billing file (and in the daily response files in a daily exchange state). The month and year
of death reported by SSA are shown in the transaction effective date field.

NOTE: In some instances, SSA may send a death notification to CMS in error. In these
cases, the state should ask the beneficiary to submit proof of identity to SSA so it can
remove the date of death from the MBR. The state may re-accrete the beneficiary to the
buy-in rolls through the normal data exchange after SSA corrects the record in the MBR.

2.6.2.2 - Beneficiary’s Loss of Medicare Eligibility
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

SSA will end Medicare entitlement for a beneficiary for various reasons, such as the loss
of entitlement to disability benefits, the receipt of a kidney transplant to treat End-Stage
Renal Disease (ESRD), or failure to meet or provide documentation to meet citizenship
or alien residency requirements.

In such cases, CMS will receive a Medicare termination notification from SSA in the CER

file exchange, which will first trigger an update to EDB, and then to TPS, to end buy-in
coverage. The buy-in end date associated with the deletion transaction will be the last
month prior to the Medicare termination.

Systems Tip: CMS sends a code 15bb to the state on the next monthly billing file (and in
the daily response files in a daily exchange state).

2.6.2.3 - Beneficiary Changes of State of Residency
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Membership in a buy-in coverage group derives from the receipt of Medicaid coverage.
Loss of state residency will disqualify an individual for Medicaid and, thus, buy-in
coverage.

2.6.2.4 - Deletion as a Result of Another State's Accretion Action
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

If a beneficiary is enrolled in buy-in in one state (“former state”) and CMS receives an
accretion action from another state (“new state”) for the same beneficiary, CMS assumes
that the new state has jurisdiction over the record. When CMS processes the accretion
from the new state, TPS will trigger a deletion to remove the records from the former
state’s buy-in rolls. The stop date in the deletion record is the month prior to the buy-in
accretion in the new state.

Systems Tip: CMS will send the former state a code 1728 deletion record and reflect the
new state in CMS records.

2.6.2.5 - Change of State Residence for SSI Recipients
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

When an SSI beneficiary moves to another state, SSA will process a change of state
residency action to update the SSI record and the MBR, which then transmits the
information to the EDB (via the CER file) to update the beneficiary’s record. The change
of residency update in EDB will cause CMS to delete the individual from the former
state’s account. The deletion (code 1728) effective date will be the last month of
residency in the “former” state.

• If the beneficiary moves from one auto-accrete state to another auto-
accrete state, CMS will auto-accrete the beneficiary in Part B in the new
state. The effective date of the accretion is the start of the first continuous
period of SSI entitlement. If the SSI record reflects earlier SSI coverage
while the beneficiary resided in the former state, CMS will send the new
state a code 1180 followed by the sub-code A. Sub-code A alerts the state
that CMS will also send a RIC-A record with the complete SSI data.

• If the beneficiary moves from an auto-accrete state to an alert state, or
from one alert state to another alert state, CMS will transmit an SSI alert
notification (code 86bb) to the new state,.

State Action: The former state should examine the Medicaid eligibility record for any
beneficiary for whom it receives a code 1728 to ensure the state closed the
beneficiary’s Medicaid eligibility record. If the former state believes it should retain
jurisdiction of the case, it must contact the new state to resolve jurisdictional issues.

Systems Tip: CMS will notify the former state of the deletion with a code 1728
transaction in the billing/response files (i.e., positions 124 to 126 on the RIC-B record
and positions 94-96 on the RIC-D record as described in chapter 3). The deletion date is
the individual’s last month of residency in the former state. Chapter 3 describes the
record format and data fields for the code 1167 accretion in the monthly billing file (RIC-
B) and, for states receiving daily files, code 1167 is also sent as a RIC-D record. The
new state will receive either an SSI alert record (code 86) or an SSI accretion record
(code 1180), if SSI entitlement continues.

NOTE: Upon receipt of the deletion transaction from CMS, the former state should
conduct a Medicaid redetermination to assess continued Medicaid eligibility, including
state residency. If the beneficiary no longer resides in the state, the state should ensure
that it has closed the Medicaid record to prevent a cycle of re-accretion and deletion
actions between states. If the state finds the individual still resides in the state, it must
contact the new state in order to resolve state residency.

2.6.2.6 - Beneficiary Becomes Entitled to Reduced or Premium-Free Part
A
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

Part A buy-in will terminate when an individual obtains enough Social Security quarters
to qualify for Premium-free Part A (either based on their own on their spouse’s record).
SSA will send a notification to CMS when coverage changes from Premium-Part A to a
reduced premium or from reduced Premium-Part A to Premium-free Part A entitlement.
Premium-based changes are received daily by CMS from SSA in the CER file exchange.
Once EDB updates the new entitlement record, TPS will trigger the appropriate
action(s).

In cases where Premium-Part A premium liability changes from the full premium to a
reduced amount, TPS will generate a deletion to stop billing at the “previous rate” and
re-accrete the record to begin state billing at the “new rate.” In cases where the
premium liability amount changes from reduced Premium-Part A to Premium-free Part
A, TPS will send a deletion and stop billing the state for Part A. The deletion date in
both instances is the month prior to the effective date of reduced or Premium-free Part A.

Systems Tip: CMS sends a code 14bb to the state to identify the deletion.

2.6.2.7 - Deletions from Other Sources
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

CMS may be notified outside of the normal data exchange that a manual deletion action
is required. CMS generally receives these requests from the state or from the SSA FO on
the Form CMS-1957 “SSO Report of State Buy-in Problem,” or Form SSA-5002-HB
“Report of Contact,” after a beneficiary reports information that indicates a change in
residency or SSI entitlement. See chapter 6, section 6.6 for additional details.

2.7 - Changes and Corrections
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.7.1 - State Correction of a Previously Submitted State Accretion or
Deletion Date
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.7.1.1 - Adjustment to the Start Date for Ongoing (Code 41) Billing Items
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The state may adjust the accretion date of an ongoing record or a new accretion to an
earlier date by submitting a code 61 transaction containing the new accretion date in the
regular buy-in data exchange.

NOTE: States should use a code 61 to adjust a period to an earlier date with caution -
only when the earlier date/period is contiguous with the current period.

• CMS will send the state a code 4361, 4363, or 4384 to reflect that CMS
has established an earlier period of state buy-in coverage in response to
the state’s retroactive accretion. If CMS establishes ongoing coverage,
the state will receive a code 1161, 1163, or 1184.

• The state may not adjust an accretion date to a later date since this would
disadvantage the beneficiary. CMS will reject the state accretion with a
code 2561, duplicate accretion action.

2.7.1.2 - Adjustment of Accretion or Deletion Date - Closed Period of State
Buy-in Coverage
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The state may send CMS a simultaneous accretion/deletion action (code 75) to establish
a closed period of state buy-in coverage separate from existing buy-in coverage already
reflected in CMS systems. CMS will acknowledge the closed period request with a reply
code 4375.

The state is responsible for the accuracy of the dates submitted. The state cannot adjust
the accretion date to a later date nor adjust the deletion date to an earlier date on a
closed period of state buy-in coverage. Either action would disadvantage the
beneficiary.

If the simultaneous accretion/deletion action duplicates an existing period of coverage on
the EDB, CMS will send the state a rejection code 2575.

• If a state receives this rejection code, it should not submit a code 61 to
change the accretion date on a closed period. The system interprets a
code 61 as a request to expand coverage. Not only will a code 61 change
the accretion date to afford greater coverage, it will also reopen the
closed period and establish ongoing coverage.
• The state may adjust the deletion date for a closed period to an earlier
date. For Part B, this may be no earlier than two months prior to the
processing month in which the adjustment is processed and, for Part A,
this may be no earlier than the calendar month in which the adjustment is
processed, except in the case of death. A death case may be deleted
retroactively to the month of death.

If the date of death (DOD) in the MBR conflicts with the date of death on a state request
to correct an erroneous code 16 death deletion, SSA will ask the state to provide
corroborating evidence to support its request.

• To correct an erroneous death deletion, submit a buy-in problem resolution
request to CMS. See chapter 6 for submission methods. A separate
memorandum is required for each request.

CMS will notify the state through the buy-in data exchange of an adjustment action that
results in a debit or credit action.

• Code 4268 - acknowledgment of a state-submitted request to move an
accretion date to a later date resulting in a credit to the state. CMS made
this adjustment because it applied an incorrect accretion effective date.
• Code 4269 - acknowledgment of a state-submitted request to move a
deletion date to an earlier date resulting in a credit to the state. CMS
made this adjustment because it applied an incorrect deletion date.
• Code 4368 - acknowledgment of a state-submitted request to move an
accretion date to an earlier date resulting in a debit to the state. CMS
made this adjustment because it applied an incorrect accretion effective
date.
• Code 4369 - acknowledgment of a state-submitted request to move a
deletion date to a later date resulting in a debit to the state. CMS made
this adjustment because it applied an incorrect deletion date.

2.7.2 - State Request for Adjustment of SSI Actions Accreted by CMS
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

An auto-accrete state may identify items on its state buy-in account that conflict with
state records or the SSA data in the SVES/SOLQ, SDX, or BENDEX.

Potential discrepancies between the EDB records and the state records or the SSA data
are:

• CMS newly auto-accreted the record to the state’s buy-in account (code 1180) or
the billing record shows ongoing buy-in (code 41), but SSA has no record of the
individual;

• SSA has a record of an individual age 65 or older in an auto-accrete state, but
CMS has no record of the individual; or

• The effective date of the CMS-initiated accretion and the effective date of SSI
eligibility differ.

In the situations described above, examine SSA data exchanges before initiating a
complaint. The SSI eligibility date and the state buy-in eligibility date can differ if:

• The beneficiary was not eligible for Medicare at the time of SSI eligibility;
• The beneficiary changed legal residence after the individual established SSI
eligibility; or
• The beneficiary’s SSI status changed from conditional to ineligible or from
ineligible to eligible, and SSA is processing a reinstatement.

States can submit a State Buy-in Resolution request to correct an erroneous SSI-based
accretion to DMSEI. See chapter 6 for instructions on how to submit buy-in cases for
resolution.

When DMSEI receives the request, it will conduct an investigation. If DMSEI
determines:

• Buy-in coverage was updated in error, the state will receive a code 1750, annulment
of entire buy-in coverage period.
• Buy-in coverage start and/or stop date is incorrect, the state will receive a credit item
(code 4268) based on the accretion date adjustment and/or deletion date adjustment.

Systems Tip: States must contact CMS to manually correct discrepant records. See
chapter 6 for instructions on how to submit buy-in cases needing resolution.

2.7.3 - State-Initiated Change Records
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.7.3.1 - Medicare Part B
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The state may change a beneficiary’s BIEC and state welfare (Medicaid) identification
number.

• A state can use code 99 to add or change the individual’s BIEC. The code 99
update will be effective with the next billing cycle.
• A state code 99 submission with blanks in positions 71-72 will not eliminate an
existing BIEC in the billing record.
• A state can use code 99 to add or change a state welfare identification number, but
cannot delete an existing state welfare identification number.
• A state code 99 submission with blanks in positions 101-120 will not eliminate an
existing state welfare identification number.

The record format is the same as the format for the state accretion or deletion action
(State Agency Input Record) described in chapter 3. The transaction code for the change
record is code 99. A code 99 action can only be applied to an open TPS record (e.g.,
code 41).

2.7.3.2 - Medicare Part A
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The state may change only the Client Identification Number on the Part A TPS record.

The transaction code for the change record is code 99 and can only apply to an open TPS
record (e.g., code 41).

2.7.4 - CMS Reply to a State-Initiated Change Record (Code 99)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

CMS will apply state change records (code 99) to existing open coverage billing records
(code 41) if the change record matches the existing EDB record on HICN/MBI and state
agency code and the EDB shows an open coverage record. If CMS applies the change, it
will not send the state a reply. Otherwise, CMS will reject the change record with the
transaction code 4999.

If the state submits a Part B code 99 with a BIEC of “P” (QMB), “L” (SLMB), or “U”
(QI) and the EDB does not reflect a current Part A and Part B entitlement and open Part
B buy-in, CMS will reject the transaction with a reply code 4999.

2.8 - SSA-Initiated Accretions - Public Welfare Accretion Procedure (Code
1167)
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The SSA FO can start buy-in coverage through the PW accretion procedure when an
individual files an application for Medicare and is, or will be, a member of a Part B buy-
in coverage group in the state. See chapter 1, section 1.6, for a list of state buy-in
coverage groups. The PW procedure allows the SSA FO to establish Part B through
state buy-in, making the state responsible for paying the Part B premiums instead of the
individual.

Each state should work with its SSA Regional Office to define the individuals for whom
SSA FOs will initiate a PW accretion and the procedures to verify an individual’s
potential membership in the state’s buy-in coverage group before initiating a PW
accretion.

Systems Tip: After SSA establishes Medicare entitlement for a beneficiary who may be
eligible for buy-in, SSA will transmit the PW accretion to CMS, which uses the code 1167
to accrete the record to the state’s Part B buy-in account. If the individual is SSI-eligible
and resides in an alert state, CMS will send an SSI alert record (code 86bb).

SSA may use the PW accretion process for SSI-eligible individuals who are also eligible
for Medicare in auto-accrete states, with the expectation that CMS will then auto-accrete
(code 1180) these individuals in Part B buy-in. Depending on the timing of the SSI
entitlement update from MBR to EDB, the state may first receive the PW accretion code
1167 followed by code 1180 (after deletion of the code 1167), or it may only receive code
1180. The state also receives a SSI alert record (code 86bb) for informational purposes.

Chapter 3 describes the record format and data fields for the code 1167 accretion in
CMS billing records (RIC-B and, for states receiving files daily, RIC-D).

2.9 - Erroneous PW Accretion - All States
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

If the state determines that a PW accretion (code 1167) was processed for an ineligible
individual, the state may appeal the action. The state must react to the PW accretion
before the end of the second month following the month in which the state received
notification of the PW accretion on its billing file. If the state does not react within the
established timeframe, the state becomes responsible for the premium liability until a
state’s deletion action is processed per the standards in section 2.6.1.3.
Example: A state receives a PW accretion (code 1167) billing record on the monthly
billing file sent by CMS February 1st. The state may submit a code 50 deletion request to
CMS within two billing months (i.e., must be received by CMS prior to 11:00 a.m. ET on
April 30th or the last business day, if the last day of the month is a non-business day).

Systems Tip: If a PW accretion is processed in error or the accretion date is incorrect,
submit a code 50 deletion or “wipe-out” to CMS in the state’s input file within the
established timeframe (two billing months). If the state submits the code 50 after the two-
month window, the deletion will be subject to the limitations of the Commissioner’s
Decision as if it were a code 51 deletion. TPS will delete the code 1167 open period and
send a deletion reply code 1750 with a modified effective end date as required by the
Commissioner’s Decision.

If the effective date of the PW accretion is correct, but the state has determined the
individual is no longer eligible for buy-in coverage, the state should submit a code 50
deletion request with the appropriate end date to establish a closed period of coverage.

2.10 - Enrollment of Persons Who Refuse to Establish Medicare Eligibility
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

If an individual refuses to cooperate with SSA to establish eligibility for Medicare Part B
(Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI)), the FO will advise the state Medicaid agency
or the office delegated to perform Medicaid eligibility determinations so they can take
any appropriate action to obtain the cooperation of the individual. The state may enroll
the individual only in Medicare Part B. The individual must enroll in Medicare Part A.

In order to enroll the individual in Part B buy-in, the state must establish that the
individual is a member of the state’s coverage group and that the individual meets the
requirements for Medicare entitlement.

The state must complete the application Form CMS-4040, “Request for Enrollment in
Supplementary Medical Insurance” which it can obtain from the FO or from the CMS
website under Medicare, CMS Forms at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/CMS-
Forms/CMS-Forms/index.html. Send the completed form and related documentation to
the FO which services the individual’s address.

Most of the information which is requested on the application can be obtained from local
county eligibility records. Enter the following:

• The beneficiary’s address, since that is the address to which the Medicare card will
be mailed; and

• The beneficiary’s HICN/MBI. If the individual does not have a HICN/MBI, contact
the local FO for assistance in obtaining a HICN/MBI for the individual.

The enrollee need not sign the application. Instead, the eligibility staff person should
complete the signature block and annotate the form to show that the information on it
was taken from local records.

The application also requests that the state submit the following documentation:

• Proof of age. The state should submit a copy of the individual’s birth certificate. If
the birth certificate is not available, submit copies of the documents which were used
to establish the date of birth in the Medicaid record; and
• Proof of citizenship or residency. If the individual was born in the United States no
proof of citizenship or residency is required. If the individual was born outside the
United States, the state should submit a copy of the evidence which was used to
establish citizenship or residency.
SSA makes the final determination of Medicare entitlement. After SSA has established
the Medicare record, SSA will accrete the individual to Part B buy-in through the PW
procedure, accretion code 1167.

2.11 - State Accretion Procedure to Establish a Closed Period of State
Buy-in Coverage
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

2.11.1 - Medicare Part B
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

The Simultaneous Accretion/Deletion (SAD) transaction (code 75), also referred to as a
“closed period,” is available to states for the purpose of inserting a closed period of buy-
in coverage. A state’s buy-in request (code 75) must contain a start and stop date.
Closed period insertions are common in SSA disability appeals cases involving
individuals with past Medicaid entitlements. In these cases, SSA issues a retroactive
SSI/SSDI award with a disability entitlement date more than 24 months in the past. In
such cases, SSA will retroactively establish Part A entitlement (starting the 25th month
after the disability entitlement date). States are required to pay Part B premiums for all
periods for which an individual is eligible for buy-in under Medicaid and is Medicare
entitled.

Example:
• SSA established retroactive premium-free Medicare Part A and Part B effective
08/2017. The beneficiary is QMB beginning 09/2017.
• The individual has SSI entitlement from 05/2017 through 07/2017. The state submits
a code 75 with a start date of 05/2017 and a stop date of 08/2017.

Systems Tip: Submit a code 75 (closed period) to insert a limited buy-in coverage period.
The code 75 must provide the start date and stop date. Failure to send both the accretion
start date and the deletion end date will result in a rejection. States may submit multiple
requests for code 75 actions on a single input file. Each discrete period must be
represented by a separate input record with the same transaction code.
• A code 4375 is returned to the state to acknowledge the successful update of a code

75 request.
• The code 75 must contain the proper Medicare identification information to allow the
item to be processed in the month submitted. If the transaction record does not match
the Medicare data on the EDB, it is automatically rejected.

2.11.2 - Medicare Part A
(Rev. 4, Issued: 08-21-20, Effective: 09-08-20, Implementation: 09-08-20)

There are situations where states fail to accrete eligible beneficiaries on a timely basis.
That is, the beneficiary is not currently eligible as a QMB or a QDWI, but was eligible
for one or more months in the past and should have been enrolled in Part A buy-in. This
situation should occur infrequently.

A Part A buy-in state may use the code 75 to establish Medicare Part A state buy-in
coverage for a closed or limited period of coverage. In rare instances, a closed period of
Part A Buy-in coverage may be updated for group payer states. A request to update a
closed period in group payer states may be directed to DMSEI (see chapter 6).

Transmittals Issued for this Chapter

Rev # Issue Date Subject Impl Date CR#

R4SPMP 08/21/2020 New State Payment of Medicare Premiums, 09/08/2020 N/A
(SPMP)
