Navigation menu

Department of Health

Individuals/Families

COVID-19 Vaccine

Birth, Death, Marriage & Divorce Records

Health Insurance Programs

Consumer Health Care Information

Community Health

Healthy Lifestyles

Health & Safety in the Home, Workplace & Outdoors

Diseases & Conditions

Data & Reports

Health Topics A to Z

Providers/Professionals

Novel Coronavirus

Narcotic Enforcement

EMS

Health Initiatives

Data & Reports

Diseases & Conditions

Patient Resources

Disease Reporting

Clinical Guidelines, Standards & Quality of Care

Permits, Licenses & Certification

Health Commerce System (HCS)

All Health Care Professionals & Patient Safety

Health Topics A to Z

Health Facilities

Compare Health Care Providers

Adult Care Facilities/Assisted Living

Home Care & Hospice

Hospitals & Clinics

New York State Veterans Homes

Nursing Homes

School Based Health Centers

Health Commerce System (HCS)

All Health Care Facilities

Health Topics A to Z

Health Data

Open Health Data

NYS Health Connector

Public Health Science Center

Data & Reports

About Us

About the Department

Related Sites

Health Topics A to Z

Search

More information about

EPIC Program

What is EPIC?

EPIC and Medicare

Apply for EPIC

Annual Statistics

Member Info

Pharmacy/Prescriber Info

EPIC Provider Page/FAQ's

Other Info

Privacy Notice

Nondiscrimination Notice/Notice of Language Availability

Contact Us

What's New?

2026 Program Highlights

The 2026 EPIC program highlights are now available. The document includes the 2026 EPIC Fee Plan Schedule and the Deductible Plan Schedule.

EPIC Outreach

The EPIC Outreach team provides educational services to the community and professional organizations. The web page EPIC Outreach outlines the mission and services provided by the team along with contact information.

FAQ

Medicare Savings Program

Common billing questions are answered in this document.

General questions are answered in this document.

Online Enrollment questions are answered in this document.

Presentations

2025 EPIC Professional Presentation is available to be downloaded to assist professionals in serving the elderly in New York State.

The presentation used for the July 30, 2019 webinar regarding Late Enrollment Penalty (LEP) assistance is available.

ONLINE ENROLLMENT

The EPIC program now offers online enrollment. Click on the flyer for more information.

You are Here: Home Page
>
Elderly Pharmaceutical Insurance Coverage (EPIC) Program
> EPIC Eligibility Requirements

EPIC Eligibility Requirements

To join EPIC, a senior must:

be a New York State resident age 65 or older

have an annual income below $75,000 if single or $100,000 if married

be enrolled or eligible to be enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan (no exceptions), and

not be receiving full Medicaid benefits.

Note:

You can join EPIC at any time during the year. Once enrolled, you will receive a 'Special Enrollment Period' to join a Medicare Part D drug plan. You are not eligible to receive EPIC benefits until you are enrolled in a Part D drug plan.

Seniors who are not eligible to join a Medicare Part D drug plan cannot join EPIC (e.g., seniors with a union/retiree drug subsidy program that is not a Part D plan, seniors without Medicare Part A or Medicare Part B).

Seniors with Medicare Advantage (HMO) health insurance can only join EPIC if they have Part D drug coverage with their HMO.

Residency

To enroll in EPIC, you must be a resident of New York State. This means that your permanent home (not a summer or winter home) is located in New York State. It also means you live in the State on a regular, ongoing basis, and your New York State address is listed as your home address on official and legal documents. You need to notify EPIC whenever you change your address.

Income

For purposes of your EPIC enrollment, household gross income is the previous year's total annual income of the senior or married spouses. It includes, but is not limited to:

Federal adjusted gross household income as reported on your income tax return;

Social Security payments (less Medicare premiums);

Railroad retirement benefits;

The taxable amount of IRA distributions and retirement annuities;

Support money, including foster care support payments;

Supplemental Security income;

Tax-exempt interest;

Worker's compensation;

Gross amount of loss-of-time insurance;

Cash public assistance and relief, other than medical assistance for the needy;

Non-taxable strike benefits;

Veterans' disability pensions;

Lottery winnings.

It does not include:

Food stamps;

Medicare premiums;

Medicaid;

Scholarships;

Grants;

Surplus food;

Payments made to veterans under the federal Veterans' Dioxin and Radiation Exposure Compensations Standards Act (Agent Orange);

Payments made to individuals because of their status as victims of Nazi persecution.

Back to top

Questions or comments: nysdohepic@primetherapeutics.com

Revised: April 2024

Department of Health

General Information

James V. McDonald, M.D., M.P.H., Commissioner

About the Department of Health

Meetings & Webcasts

Employment Opportunities

Wadsworth Center

AIDS Institute

New York State Veterans Homes

Helen Hayes Hospital

NY State of Health (Health Plan Marketplace)

New York State Physician Profile

New York State Public Health Corps

Contact

Councils and Boards

Grants & Funding Opportunities

Laws & Regulations

Press Releases, Reports & Publications

Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)

Forms

Current Issues/Info

Abortion in NYS: Know Your Rights

Bird Flu (Avian Influenza)

Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Program (CDPAP)

Donate Life - Enroll Today!

Drinking Water Protection Program

Ending the Epidemic

Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Health

Long COVID

Measles

Medicaid in New York State

Office of Drug User Health

Polio

Reproductive Health

Vaping and E-Cigarettes

Wastewater Surveillance

Help

Help Increasing the Text Size in Your Web Browser

File Formats Used on this Web Site

Disclaimer

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Language Assistance

English

Español (Spanish)

中文 (Chinese)

Русский (Russian)

ইংরেজি (Bengali)

Italiano (Italian)

Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian-Creole)

한국어 (Korean)

יידיש (Yiddish)

العربية (Arabic)

Polski (Polish)

Français (French)

اُردُو (Urdu)

Website Language Translations

CONNECT WITH US

FACEBOOK

X

YOUTUBE

INSTAGRAM

FLICKR

LINKEDIN

THREADS

BLUESKY
