NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Ofce of Health Insurance Programs Medicare Savings Program Application
Please print clearly and do not write in the dark shaded area.
APPLICANT
First Name, Middle Initial, Last Name Home Phone Number
( )
Home Address Street Apt. No. City State Zip Code County

Is this a shelter? Yes No
Mailing Address Street/P.O. Box (If Diferent from Above) Apt. No. City State Zip Code County

NAMES
List your name frst. Include aliases and maiden name. If necessary, attach an extra sheet to list all children.
First Name, Middle Initial, Last Name Date of Birth Sex Gender Identity** Social Security Number Race/Ethnicity Group
(MM/DD/YY) M, F, X (Optional) (See codes below)

Self
/ / — —
Spouse
/ / — —
Child*
/ / — —
Child*
/ / — —
*If under 18 years of age
**Gender Identity: Gender identity is how you perceive yourself and what you call yourself. Your gender identity can be the same as or diferent from your sex assigned at birth.
Gender Identity Codes: M-Male, F-Female, N-Non-Binary or Non-Conforming, X-X, T-Transgender, D-Diferent Identity: Describe your Identity in space provided.
Race/Ethnic Group Codes: B-Black or African American, W-White, H-Hispanic or Latino, †A-Asian or Pacifc Islander, I-American Indian or Alaskan Native,
†
P-Native Hawaiian or other Pacifc Islander, U-Unknown, O-Other.
†If you have selected A-Asian, or P-Native Hawaiian or Pacifc Islander please see below information on Other AAPI.
‡Other Asian American/Pacifc Islander (optional) - Please identify your AAPI subgroup. Subgroups within this community include, but are not limited to: Chinese, Japanese, Filipino,
Korean, Vietnamese, Cambodian, Indonesian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan, Taiwanese, Native Hawaiian, Samoan, Tongan, Guamanian or Chamorro, Marshallese, Fijian, and other.
CITIZENSHIP INFORMATION
Are you a U.S. citizen? Yes No
If No, do you have satisfactory immigration status? Yes No Include alien number, date of status, and date entered country, if applicable.
Alien Number Date of Status (DOS) Date Entered Country (DEC)

Is your spouse a U.S. citizen? Yes No
If No, does your spouse have satisfactory immigration status? Yes No Include alien number, date of status, and date entered country, if applicable.
Alien Number Date of Status (DOS) Date Entered Country (DEC)

MEDICARE INFORMATION
Applicant’s Medicare Number (From Red and Blue Medicare Card)

Efective Date Efective Date
Do you have Medicare Part A? Yes No Do you have Medicare Part B? Yes No

Spouse’s Medicare Number (From Red and Blue Medicare Card)

Efective Date Efective Date
Does your spouse have Medicare Part A? Yes No Does your spouse have Medicare Part B? Yes No

Would you like us to consider providing retroactive reimbursement of your Medicare premium? Yes No
Do you or your spouse pay any health insurance premiums other than Medicare? Yes No
Who? Monthly Amount
$
Do you or your spouse pay child/spousal support? Yes No
Who? Monthly Amount
$
Do you or your spouse receive payments from or are named benefciary of a trust? Yes No
Who? Value
$
INCOME
List below all available income such as: salary, wages, pension, social security, severance pay, rental or business income, etc. If necessary, attach an extra sheet to list all sources of income.
Name of Applicant, Spouse, Who Provides the Money? How Ofen?
What Amount?
or Child Under 18 (Name/Source of Income) (Weekly, Every Two Weeks, Monthly, Other)

Do you want to receive notices in: English Only Spanish and English?
CONSENT
I understand that by signing this application/certifcation form I agree to any investigation made by the Department of Social Services to verify or confrm the
information I have given or any other investigation made by them in connection with my request for Medicaid. If additional information is requested, I will provide it.
SIGNATURES
Applicant/Representative Signature Date

Spouse Signature Date

Representative Address Relationship

City State ZIP Code Phone Number
( )

DOH-4328 (11/23) Page 1 of 2

INSTRUCTIONS
PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT LEGIBLY
COMPLETE THE APPLICATION
Be sure to answer all the questions. If you are married and living with your spouse, you must complete both the “Self” and “Spouse”
questions on the application (even if the spouse is not applying for the MSP).

SIGN AND DATE THE APPLICATION
If both spouses are applying, both must sign the MSP application.

INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING VERIFICATION DOCUMENTS
Please review this list and submit the documents that you will need to provide in order for the Medicaid Program to determine if you are
eligible for MSP. If you are requesting retroactive reimbursement of your Medicare premiums, you must send proof of income for the
previous three-months. If there is an applying spouse, the spouse must also provide documentation.
• A photocopy of the front and back of your Medicare card.
• Proof of income: Paycheck stubs, letter from employer, income tax return, award letter for any unearned income beneft such as social
security, unemployment, or veteran’s beneft, or letter from renter, boarder or tenant.
• Health insurance premiums that you pay other than Medicare: Letter from employer, premium statement, or pay stub.
• Proof of date of birth: State driver’s license, U.S. birth certifcate, permanent resident card (“green card”), or NYS Beneft Identifcation Card.
• Proof of residence: Lease/letter/rent receipt with your home address from your landlord, driver’s license (if issued in the past 6 months),
utility bill (gas, electric, phone, cable, fuel or water), government ID card with address, property tax records or mortgage statement, or
postmarked envelope or postcard (cannot use if sent to a P.O. Box).
• If you are not a U.S. citizen, you must provide documents indicating your current immigration status.
Mail the application and required documentation to your local Department of Social Services (LDSS) or Human Resource Administration
(HRA). To fnd the address in your county: http://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/medicaid/ldss.htm.

TERMS, RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
By completing and signing this form, I am applying for the Medicare Savings Program. PAYMENT OF YOUR MEDICARE PREMIUM IS A
MEDICAID BENEFIT.

PENALTIES
I understand that my application may be investigated, and I agree to cooperate in such an investigation. Federal and State laws provide for
penalties of fne, imprisonment or both if you do not tell the truth when you apply for Medicaid benefts or at any time when you are
questioned about your eligibility, or cause someone else not to tell the truth regarding your application or your continuing eligibility.

CHANGES
I agree to immediately report any changes to the information on this application.

SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER (SSN)
If you are applying for the Medicare Savings Program, you must report your SSN. The laws requiring this are: 18NYCRR Sections 351.2,
360-1.2, and 360-3.2(j)(3); 42USC 1320b-7. SSNs are used in many ways, both within the local social services districts and also between local
social services districts and federal, state, and local agencies, both in New York and in other jurisdictions. Some uses of SSNs are: to check
identity, to identify and verify earned and unearned income, to see if absent parents can get health insurance for applicants, to see if
applicants can get child support and to see if applicants can get money or other help.

CERTIFICATION OF CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION STATUS
I certify, under the penalty of perjury, by signing my name on this application, that I, and/or any person for whom I am signing is a U.S.
citizen or national of the United States or has satisfactory immigration status. I understand that information about me will be submitted to
the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) for verifcation of my immigration status, if applicable. I further understand
that the use or disclosure of information about me is restricted to persons and organizations directly connected with the verifcation of
immigration status and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Medicaid program.

NON-DISCRIMINATION NOTICE
This application will be considered without regard to race, color, sex, disability, religious creed, national origin, or political belief.

CERTIFICATION
In signing this application, I swear and afrm that the information I have given or will give to the Department of Social Services as a basis
for Medicaid is correct. I also assign to the Department of Social Services any rights I have to pursue support from persons having legal
responsibility for my support and to pursue other third-party resources. I understand that Medicaid paid on my behalf may be recovered
from persons who had legal responsibility for my support at the time medical services were obtained.

If afer reading and completing this form, you decide that you DO NOT want to apply for the Medicare Savings Program, please sign your
name below:
I consent to withdraw my application:
Applicant Signature Date

Signature of Person Who Obtained Eligibility Information Date Employed By

Date Eligibility Determined By Worker Date Eligibility Approved By

Central/Ofce Application Date Unit ID Worker ID Case Type Case No. Reuse Ind.

Case Name District Registry No. Ver.

Efective Date Reason Code Proxy
MA Disp. Denial Withdrawal ▫ Yes ▫ No

DOH-4328 (11/23) Page 2 of 2
