Michelle Baass | Director

DATE: August 21, 2026

TO: ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS Letter No.: I 26-13
ALL COUNTY WELFARE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
ALL COUNTY MEDI-CAL PROGRAM SPECIALISTS/LIAISONS
ALL COUNTY HEALTH EXECUTIVES
ALL COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH DIRECTORS
ALL COUNTY MEDS LIAISONS

SUBJECT: QUALIFIED NON-CITIZEN CHANGES FROM HOUSE RESOLUTION 1 (H.R. 1)
(Reference: All County Welfare Directors Letter Nos: 18-09, 19-20, 16-21,
25-13, I25-18, 25-33 and Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter
Nos: 26-02, 25-27)

Purpose
The purpose of this All County Welfare Directors Letter (ACWDL) is to provide counties
with guidance regarding the implementation of the federal full scope Medicaid eligibility
changes for certain Qualified Non-Citizens (QNCs) under Section 71109 of House
Resolution 1 (H.R.1) (Public Law 119-21).

This ACWDL supersedes the QNC-related guidance provided in Medi-Cal Eligibility
Division Information Letter 25-18 (MEDIL 25-18).

Background
The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996
created the federal term “qualified alien” to define which immigration groups were
eligible for certain federal public benefits, such as Medicaid. The Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) refers to the term “qualified alien” as “qualified non-citizen” (QNC).

Current federal law states that QNCs are eligible for federal full scope Medicaid if they
have resided in the United States for a minimum of five years, unless they are exempt.
This requirement is referred to as the five-year bar. Many QNC immigration statuses are
exempt from the five-year bar (e.g., Asylees, Refugees, and Deportation Withheld). QNCs

California Department of Health Care Services State of California
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Gavin Newsom, Governor
1501 Capitol Avenue | Sacramento, CA | 95899-7413
MS 4607 | Phone (916) 552-9200 | www.dhcs.ca.gov California Health and Human Services Agency

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 2
August 21, 2026

are also exempt from the five-year bar if they are a Veteran or active-duty service
member, are under 21, or are pregnant.

In California, QNCs who would meet the eligibility requirements for federal full scope
Medicaid but for the five-year bar are granted state-funded full scope Medi-Cal until
they are eligible for full scope Medicaid. If an individual does not meet the eligibility
requirements for federal full scope Medicaid, Federal Financial Participation (FFP) is only
available for their emergency and pregnancy-related services.

Federal Medicaid Eligibility Changes Under H.R.1
On July 4, 2025, H.R. 1 (Public Law 119-21), which the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) refers to as the Working Families Tax Cut (WFTC) legislation, was signed
into law. Section 71109 of the law, titled “Alien Medicaid Eligibility,” changes federal full
scope Medicaid eligibility for some QNCs, not whether someone will still be considered
a QNC for immigration purposes. The QNC federal full scope Medicaid eligibility
changes take effect on October 1, 2026.

The QNC statuses that will remain eligible for federal full scope Medicaid, so long as
they meet all other Medicaid eligibility requirements, are:
• Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs) who are exempt from or have met the five-
year bar;
• Cuban/Haitian Entrants; and
• Migrants legally residing in the United States and its territories under the
Compact of Free Association (COFA), such as citizens from the Marshall Islands,
Micronesia, or Palau.

QNC immigration statuses that remain eligible for federal full scope Medicaid are
considered to have Satisfactory Immigration Status (SIS). SIS means the person’s
immigration status is satisfactory for federal full scope Medicaid eligibility. If a person
does not have an immigration status that is satisfactory for federal full scope Medicaid
eligibility, they are considered to have an Unsatisfactory Immigration Status (UIS).

Beginning October 1, 2026, California will provide state-funded full scope Medi-Cal to
QNCs who no longer meet the immigration status criteria for federal full scope
Medicaid. QNCs who are subject to and have not met the five-year bar already receive
state-funded full scope Medi-Cal and will not be impacted by this change.

QNC Immigration Statuses Eligible to Federal Full Scope Medicaid (Prior to
October 1, 2026)
• LPRs who are exempt from or have met the five-year bar

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 3
August 21, 2026

• Cuban/Haitian Entrants
• COFA migrants
• Refugees
• Asylees
• Individuals granted withholding of removal
• Conditional Entrants
• Paroled into the U.S. for one year or more
• Amerasian immigrants
• Victims of trafficking
• Battered non-citizens and certain family members
• Deportation withheld

QNC Immigration Statuses Eligible to Federal Full Scope Medicaid (Effective
October 1, 2026)
• LPRs who are exempt from or have met the five-year bar, including Amerasian
immigrants
• Cuban/Haitian Entrants
• COFA migrants

On April 8, 2026, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) released State
Health Official (SHO) letter 26-001, Implementation of Section 71109 “Alien Medicaid
Eligibility.” The SHO provides states with guidance on implementing Section 71109,
which is included in this ACWDL.

Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 (CHIPRA 214)
Under CHIPRA 214, lawfully present children under the age of 21 and lawfully present
pregnant people, including during the 12-month postpartum period, are eligible for
federal full scope Medi-Cal, so long as they meet all other Medi-Cal eligibility criteria.
Individuals who are eligible for federal full scope Medicaid receive FFP for all their Medi-
Cal services.

All QNC statuses are considered lawfully present. Therefore, QNC children under the age
of 21 and QNC pregnant people, including during the 12-month postpartum period, will
remain eligible for federal full scope Medi-Cal, so long as they meet all other Medi-Cal
eligibility criteria.

QNCs and the Five-Year Bar
Under current federal law, some QNCs must satisfy a five-year waiting period before
becoming eligible for federal full scope Medicaid. Individuals in certain immigration
categories are exempt from this waiting period. Exempt immigration categories include:

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 4
August 21, 2026

• Refugees,
• Asylees,
• Individuals granted withholding of deportation or removal,
• Cuban or Haitian entrants,
• COFA migrants (citizens of Compact of Free Association nations),
• Survivors of trafficking (and qualifying family members), and
• Amerasian immigrants who are an LPR.

Additionally, QNCs are exempt from the five-year bar if they are:
• Veterans or active duty service members (including their families),
• Under age 21, or
• Pregnant (including individuals up to 12 months postpartum).

New H.R.1 Rule Clarification:
Beginning October 1, 2026, H.R.1 narrows eligibility for federally funded full scope
Medicaid for non-citizens. Under these new rules, LPRs are the only immigration
category still subject to the five-year bar. All other previously exempt groups remain
exempt.

California will continue to provide state-funded full scope Medi-Cal to LPRs during their
five-year waiting period as long as they meet all other Medi-Cal eligibility requirements
(i.e., income, residency, etc.) For more information about the five-year bar, refer to
ACWDL 18-09 or enclosure in MEDIL 25-27.

Immigration Status Adjustments and the Five-Year Bar
An immigration status adjustment occurs when an individual's immigration status is
adjusted to LPR, such as moving from a refugee or asylee status to an LPR status.

Whether the five-year bar applies following an adjustment of immigration status to LPR
depends on the individual's prior immigration status.
• Individuals who adjust from an exempt status, such as refugees, asylees, persons
granted withholding of removal, or Amerasian immigrants, continue to be
exempt from the five-year bar after obtaining LPR status.
• Individuals whose prior status was not exempt remain subject to the five-year bar
when they adjust to LPR. In such cases, the five-year waiting period begins on the
date that LPR status is granted.

Additionally, LPRs are exempt from the five-year bar if they are:
• Veterans or active-duty service members (including their families),
• Under age 21, or

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 5
August 21, 2026

• Pregnant (including individuals up to 12 months postpartum).

Verify Lawful Presence Update
The California Healthcare Eligibility, Enrollment, and Retention System (CalHEERS) uses
the Verify Lawful Presence (VLP) hub to electronically verify immigration status.
CalHEERS is scheduled to implement an update to VLP in Release 26.9, September 21,
2026. This update will add a new Eligible Non-Citizen (ENC) indicator to the VLP
response to identify QNCs statuses that may continue to qualify for federal full scope
Medicaid and Covered California Advance Premium Tax Credit (APTC). The ENC indicator
will also be included in the VLP response that is sent to the California Statewide
Automated Welfare System (CalSAWS). VLP indicators are specific to VLP. They are not
provided on the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) response.

When the ENC indicator is set to ”Y” (for yes), VLP has electronically verified that the
person is an LPR, Cuban/Haitian Entrant, or COFA migrant. The ENC indicator by itself
does not determine eligibility for federal full scope Medicaid. For LPRs who are not
exempt from the five-year bar, counties must also check the five-year bar information
returned on the VLP response.

For VLP examples, refer to the QNC County Support Training located in your county
SFTP folder: DHCS/PDB/COUNTIES/[county name].

Federal Requirement to Re-verify the Immigration Status of Impacted QNCs
Under Section 71109, states are required to re-verify the immigration status of all Medi-
Cal members with a QNC status who will no longer be eligible for federal full scope
Medicaid as of October 1, 2026. Before contacting the Medi-Cal member, states must
first attempt to re-verify the member’s immigration status through electronic verification
sources with the information available on the member’s record.

Electronic immigration status verification sources:
• VLP for Modified Adjusted Gross Income records (MAGI); and
• SAVE for both MAGI and Non-Modified Adjusted Gross Income (non-MAGI)
records.

If the state cannot electronically verify that the member’s immigration status remains
eligible for federal full scope Medicaid, the member must be given a reasonable
opportunity to provide new immigration status information to establish a status that will
remain eligible for federal full scope Medicaid.
If the state can electronically verify that the member’s immigration status remains
eligible for federal full scope Medicaid, their record must be updated to reflect the

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 6
August 21, 2026

electronically verified status. Counties shall not require the members to take any further
action to confirm their immigration status.

Steps to Reassess Impacted QNCs
To comply with the federal requirement to re-verify the immigration statuses of QNCs
who will no longer be eligible for federal full scope Medicaid and to ensure members
receive the most beneficial coverage to which they are entitled, DHCS has partnered
with CalSAWS and CalHEERS to implement a one-time process outlined below.

Step 1 – Electronic Verification
At the end of September 2026, records of impacted QNCs will be automatically
submitted for electronic immigration status re-verification. VLP will be used to re-verify
the MAGI population and SAVE will be used to re-verify the Non-MAGI population. For
this one-time process, CalSAWS will suppress SAVE alerts that are generated when a
SAVE verification response is received.

Step 2 – Member Outreach Notice
DHCS will send a Member Outreach Notice to the impacted QNC population, on a flow
basis, beginning September 14, 2026, with instructions to report any change in
immigration status to the county by December 1, 2026. The Member Outreach Notice
meets the federal requirement to provide members with a reasonable opportunity to
provide new immigration status information to establish a status that will remain eligible
for federal full scope Medicaid. The county is responsible for timely updating the case
record when a member reports a new immigration status.

REMINDER: Even if the county receives a verification of the immigration document from
the member, the county must still re-run VLP or SAVE with the new information to
electronically verify the member’s immigration status.

For additional information about the Member Outreach Notice, see the section
“Member Outreach Notice – General Information Notice” at the end of this ACWDL.

Step 3 – DHCS County List Processing
DHCS will provide each county with three lists, uploaded to each county’s SFTP folder:
DHCS/PDB/COUNTIES/[county name]. Counties must review the lists, take required
county action, and provide DHCS with the status of each record on the Immigration
Status Change List and Immigration Status Conflict List by December 15, 2026. The
counties will return the lists to DHCS by uploading them to the SFTP folder:
DHCS/PDB/COUNTIES/COUNTIES TO DHCS.

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 7
August 21, 2026

• Immigration Status Change List – Requires County Action
This list includes QNCs whose VLP or SAVE response indicates the person has an
immigration status that will remain eligible for federal full scope Medicaid. The
county must:
o Update the CalSAWS Citizenship Detail Page with the information from the
VLP or SAVE verification response,
o Run the Eligibility Determination and Benefits Calculation (EDBC) and
confirm the updated immigration status information is sent to the Medi-
Cal Eligibility Data System (MEDS), and
o Document the updated immigration status in the case file.
o No further action is required.

• Immigration Status Conflict List – Requires County Action
This list includes QNCs whose VLP or SAVE response indicates that additional
action is required (i.e., “Institute Additional Verification”) and QNCs who do not
have the required immigration status information on their record to initiate a VLP
or SAVE verification request. For example, an automated SAVE verification
request requires an Alien Number. If there is no Alien Number on the member’s
record, this person will be included in the Immigration Status Conflict List.

Counties must first review the member’s case file to see whether immigration
information is available to resolve the conflict. For example, immigration
document information or an Alien Number that can be used to initiate a VLP or
SAVE verification request. Because the U.S. citizenship or immigration status
information could not be electronically verified by VLP or SAVE for the members
on this list, the county must provide the member with a 90-day reasonable
opportunity period (ROP) to provide information or documentation to establish
U.S. citizenship or SIS.
o If the member provides information or documentation to establish U.S.
citizenship or SIS during the 90-day ROP, the county must:
▪ Update the CalSAWS Citizenship Detail Page,
▪ Complete a VLP or SAVE verification,
▪ Run and accept EDBC and confirm the updated immigration
status information is sent to MEDS, and
▪ Document in the case file.
▪ No further action is required.
o If the member does not provide information or documentation to
establish U.S. citizenship or SIS by the end of the 90-day ROP, no
adverse action will occur. Members will maintain their full scope Medi-
Cal. The county must:

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 8
August 21, 2026

▪ Maintain the previously verified QNC status on the member’s
record, and
▪ Document in the case file.
▪ No further action is required.

• Impacted QNC Population List – Does NOT Require County Action
Information Only. This list includes the impacted QNC population whose VLP or
SAVE verification response matches the QNC status on their record. For example,
their record indicates they have a refugee immigration status, and the VLP or
SAVE verification response confirms their refugee immigration status.

Step 4 – Transition to State-Funded Full Scope
DHCS will automatically transition the QNCs who are no longer eligible for federal full
scope Medicaid to state-only aid codes on January 1, 2027. Beginning December 1,
2026, the state-funded full scope population will be sent Managed Care to Fee-for-
Service (FFS) Transition notices informing them that they will transition from the
Managed Care health care delivery system to the FFS health care delivery system on
January 1, 2027.

DHCS reminds counties to review the provided lists and update case records by the
specified deadline to ensure that QNCs who remain eligible for federal full scope
coverage are not assigned state-only aid codes or sent Managed Care to FFS Transition
notices.

QNCs Dually Eligible for Medicare and Medi-Cal
Sections 1903(v)(5) and 1899C of the Social Security Act, as added by section 71109 and
section 71201 of H.R. 1, impact qualified non-citizens (QNC) who are dually eligible for
Medicare and Medicaid (known as “dually eligible beneficiaries”). This population
includes members enrolled in Medicare Parts A or B, or both, who receive federal full-
scope Medicaid benefits or assistance with Medicare costs through Medicare Savings
Programs (MSPs) or Buy-In.

Effective October 1, 2026, FFP will be eliminated for dually enrolled QNCs over the age
of 21 who are not pregnant, are receiving full-scope Medi-Cal, and do not fall under one
of the following three categories: Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs), Cuban/Haitian
entrants, or COFA migrants. This elimination also results in the loss of their Medicare
Savings Program (MSP) or Buy-in, and subsequently, these individuals will also lose their
Medicare coverage on February 1, 2027. These individuals will continue to receive their
core federal Medicare coverage after October 1, 2026; however, they will no longer
qualify for federally matched Medicaid-funded premium buy-ins. To prevent an

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 9
August 21, 2026

immediate disruption during this transition, DHCS will use State General Funds to ensure
individuals enrolled in an MSP or Buy-in retain their eligibility until they are discontinued
from Medicare.

Eligibility for these individuals must be sustained under state-only funding. Counties
must not terminate or reduce benefits unless an official data exchange confirms the
individual has been completely terminated from Medicare benefits by the Social Security
Administration (SSA). Counties may become aware of a termination through a MEDS
alert, an annual renewal review, or a self-reported change brought directly to the county
by the individual or their representative. Upon notification and confirmation through the
official data exchange, counties must act immediately in accordance with current
processes for beneficiaries losing Medicare coverage.

As a reminder, eligibility staff must complete the following steps:
• Step 1: Update the Individual’s Medicare Status within the CalSAWS System
• Step 2: If the individual is currently enrolled in an MSP or Buy-in:
o Process the formal change in circumstances
o Perform an Ex Parte Review
o Run Eligibility Determination, Benefit and Calculation (EDBC)
o Issue a formal 10-day Notice of Action (NOA)

Additionally, per existing policy in ACWDL 25-03, which eliminated the requirement to
apply for unconditionally available income, counties are not required to send this
population to apply for Medicare.

Beneficiary Experience Timeline Example:
• Before October 1, 2026
 Current Status: An Individual is a Qualified non-citizen who is dually
eligible. They hold federal full-scope Medi-Cal and are enrolled in a
Medicare Savings Program or buy-in, which pays for their Medicare
premiums and cost-sharing,
• Starting October 1, 2026
 Policy Change: Under H.R. 1, only qualified non-citizens who fall under
three categories (LPR. Cuban/Haitian entrants, and COFA migrants) will
continue to be eligible for federally funded full scope Medi-Cal and federal
MSP.
 Beneficiary Experience: No immediate disruption. DHCS will transition
them to state-funded full scope Medi-Cal and also use state general funds
to maintain MSP/buy-in eligibility until Medicare is terminated.
• Starting December 2026

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 10
August 21, 2026

 Beneficiary Experience: No longer eligible QNCs will be identified and
receive notice from SSA informing them that their Medicare will end
effective February 1, 2027.
• Starting January 4, 2027
 Administrative Change: SSA will process back-end administrative
terminations of Medicare benefits for non-eligible QNCs.
 Beneficiary Experience: No disruption yet. Although the administrative
action occurs on this date, the Medicare billing calendar extends active
coverage through January 31, 2027.
• Starting February 1, 2027
 Coverage Change: Medicare coverage has officially terminated.
 Beneficiary Experience: Individuals will no longer have access to the
Medicare coverage they previously received. In addition, they will
experience the loss of their MSP or buy-in. However, if eligible, their state-
funded full scope Medi-Cal coverage remains active.
 County Action Required: Counties must immediately initiate the CalSAWS
case updates, perform the ex parte review, run EDBC, and issue the 10-day
NOA.

SSI, Foster Care, and CalWORKs
CMS informed states that the provisions in 8 U.S.C. § 1612(b)(2), which require that
certain groups, such as individuals receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
benefits, continue to receive full scope Medi-Cal benefits, remain unchanged. However,
because some QNC populations will become ineligible for FFP starting October 1, 2026,
CMS will no longer require states to offer full scope health coverage to QNCs who are
ineligible for federal full scope Medicaid under section 1903(v)(5) of the Social Security
Act. This includes asylees, refugees, parolees, or victims of trafficking, including
populations listed in section 1902 of the Act. These individuals will continue to receive
the SSI payment portion but will no longer qualify for federal full scope Medicaid.

In California, for SSI and Supplementary Payment (SSP), CalWORKs and Foster Care
recipients, DHCS has bundled payments with their Medi-Cal eligibility. As a result, DHCS
will continue to provide state-funded full scope coverage, including non-emergency
dental services, to SSI/SSP, CalWORKs, and Foster Care eligible QNCs who will not be
eligible for federal full scope Medicaid at this time.

Systems Overview
CalSAWS and CalHEERS must implement the QNC changes necessary to meet the
federal implementation requirement by October 1, 2026. The systems are on schedule to

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 11
August 21, 2026

implement the QNC changes in September 2026, complying with the federal
requirement.

Delivery System Changes
Beginning January 1, 2027, Medi-Cal members who do not have a SIS for federal full
scope Medicaid will no longer be eligible for the Managed Care health care delivery
system. Members without SIS will transition from their Managed Care Plan to the FFS
health care delivery system on January 1, 2027. Beginning December 1, 2026, DHCS will
send a Managed Care to Fee-for-Service (FFS) Transition notice to inform impacted
members about these changes.
Information about the FFS transition is available on the DHCS Medi-Cal Changes
webpage.

DHCS will provide additional information for counties in an upcoming Medi-Cal
Eligibility Division Information Letter (MEDIL).

County Reminders
Counties are reminded that citizenship and immigration status information is tracked
using the Citizen/Alien Indicator, Alien Eligibility Code, and Date of Entry/Grant Date in
MEDS. Counties must take the steps necessary to ensure the “Citizenship Status Detail
Page” in CalSAWS is accurately completed and MEDS is updated with all required
citizenship or immigration status coding based on the outcome of the citizenship or
immigration verification process.

See ACWDL 18-09 for additional information on citizenship and immigration status
coding and ACWDL 19-20 regarding the SAVE process.

Member Outreach Notice – General Information Notice
DHCS will send QNCs who are losing their eligibility for federal full scope Medicaid a
general information notice. The notice will be mailed on a flow basis starting September
14, 2026. It will include the Notice of Language Services (GEN 1365). The Outreach
Notice will be translated into all threshold languages, and the members will receive the
notice in the language that is indicated on their record. DHCS has published the
Outreach Notice in MEDIL 26-21.

The Outreach Notice provides general information about the upcoming changes
impacting some QNCs, including but not limited to:
• There are no changes to their full scope Medi-Cal coverage. They will retain full
scope Medi-Cal benefits.

Letter No.: I 26-13
Page 12
August 21, 2026

• On January 1, 2027, they will transition from their Managed Care Plan to FFS.
• If there has been a change in their immigration status or if they think Medi-Cal
does not have their correct immigration status, they must contact their county to
update their record by December 1, 2026, to avoid being transitioned from
Managed Care to FFS.

If you have any questions regarding the information provided in this letter, please
contact the Immigration Unit at ImmigrationPolicy@dhcs.ca.gov. County questions
regarding policy guidance should be sent to MCED-Policy@dhcs.ca.gov.

Sincerely,

Sarah Crow, Chief
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division
