NYSED.GOV

Board of Regents

News

Index A-Z

Translate

Contact Us

NYSED Employment

Business Portal

Home

Programs

Application Submission Process

National School Lunch Program (NSLP)

Summer Food Service Program (SFSP)

Afterschool Snack Program (Snack)

Farm to School

Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program (FFVP)

School Breakfast Program (SBP)

Special Milk Program (SMP)

Eligibility

Financial Management

Administrative Review

SFAs Scheduled For Administrative Review

Findings Summary Documents for Completed Reviews

Procurement

Statutes and Regulations

Guidance

Buy American Provision

Management Companies

Contracts & Extensions

Civil Rights

Training

Upcoming Events

Webinar Library

SFSP Training

Tutorials

CN Snip-its

Master Instructor Training Network

Training Resources

Training Listserv

Search

THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234

Office of P-20 Education Policy

Child Nutrition Program Administration

89 Washington Avenue, Room 375 EBA, Albany, NY 12234

Phone: (518) 473-8781 Fax: (518) 473-0018

To:

School Food Service Directors/Managers

From:

Child Nutrition Program Administration

Date:

Tuesday, May 13, 2025

Subject:

New York State Universal Free Meals

New York State Universal Free Meals

The 2025-2026 Executive Budget amended New York State Education Law by adding Section 915a Universal Free School Meals. Beginning in school year 2025-2026, New York State School Food Authorities (SFAs) participating in the federal school lunch and/or breakfast programs are required to provide reimbursable school meals at no cost to all students. The state will reimburse SFAs up to the combined state and federal reimbursement rate for a free meal for each federally reimbursed reduced-price and paid meal claimed.

Schools and districts not currently enrolled in federal meal programs must apply to the New York State Education Department, Office of Child Nutrition by July 31, 2025, to participate in the 2025-2026 school year to provide free school meals.

Technical Assistance

The Office of Child Nutrition will provide guidance and technical assistance directly to SFAs during this transition. A webinar has been scheduled for June 5, 2025, at 1:00pm. Please call 518-473-8781 or email your CN representative for additional assistance.

Maximize Federal Reimbursement

The Universal Free School Meals Program requires SFAs to maximize federal reimbursement by operating in the Community Eligibility Provision (CEP), if eligible, or Provision 2. Residential Child Care Institutions (RCCIs) without day students can continue to operate standard counting and claiming as all students already receive free meals. RCCIs with day students must operate Provision 2.

SFAs must immediately determine what actions are needed to maximize federal reimbursement for the 2025-2026 school year:

For recipient agencies/school buildings (RAs) currently operating in CEP: Reapply for CEP if RA Individual Student Percentages (ISPs) based on April 1, 2025, enrollment result in a higher CEP ISP(s).

For RAs potentially eligible to operate CEP: Apply for CEP if a CEP ISP(s) of at least 25% can be obtained.

For RAs not eligible to operate CEP: Apply to operate Provision 2.

Maximize the Number of Children Eligible for Federal Free Meals

SFAs are required to conduct the Direct Certification Matching Process at least three times a year and designate children eligible for free meals (other source categorically eligible) who are siblings or household members of SNAP or Medicaid recipients, or who are foster, homeless, migrant, runaway, or HeadStart/Evenstart participating children.

Promotion of SNAP

SFAs must actively promote the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) to students and their parents. Further guidance on how to fulfill this requirement is currently being developed and will be provided once available.

Popular Topics

Accommodating Children with Disabilities

"And Justice For All" Posters

Annual Checklist

Child Nutrition Spotlight

Community Eligibility Provision

Direct Certification Matching Process

Disclosure

Eligibility

Equipment Purchases Approval Process

Food Based Menu Planning

Food Service Management Company

Forms

Grants

HACCP/Sanitation

Indirect Cost Guidance

Local School Wellness Policy

Nonprofit School Food Service Account

Preschool/Prekindergarten

Professional Standards

Program Integrity Final Rule

Public Reports

Recalls

Regulations

Reimbursement Rates

Smart Snacks in School

Verification

How Do I…?

Add a Program

Add a Recipient Agency

Add a User to CNMS

Adjust a Claim

Appeal A State Agency

Become a New SFA

Change My CNMS Password

Complete the Health Inspection Report

Conduct a Self-review

Determine Selling Prices

Find Free Summer Meals

Nominate a Person/Program for the CN Spotlight

Renew SAMS Registration

Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse

Request a Breakfast After the Bell Waiver

Reset my CNMS password

Reset My DCMP Password

Submit a Claim

Terminate Participation

Update my CNMS Administrator

Quick Links

CDC

CACFP

DUNS

Food Buying Guide

FRAC School Breakfast

Hunger Solutions

Information and Reporting Services

Institute of Child Nutrition (previously NFSMI)

MyBenefits

NYS Dept of Agriculture and Markets: Farm to School

NYS DOH CACFP

NYS OCFS Foster Care Contacts

NYS-TEACHS

OGS

School Nutrition Association

SED Charter School Office

SEDREF Information Page

SEDREF Query

SAM

Team Nutrition

USDA

WellSAT

WIC Strong

Media Center

Newsletters

Video Gallery

Subscribe

Facebook

X (Formerly Twitter)

Instagram

LinkedIn

New York State Education Building

89 Washington Avenue

Albany, NY 12234

CONTACT US

NYSED General Information: (518) 474-3852

ACCES-VR: 1-800-222-JOBS (5627)

TASC (formerly GED): (518) 474-5906

New York State Archives: (518) 474-6926

New York State Library: (518) 474-5355

New York State Museum: (518) 474-5877

Office of Higher Education: (518) 486-3633

Office of the Professions: (518) 474-3817

P-12 Education: (518) 474-3862

EMAIL CONTACTS

Adult Education & Vocational Services

New York State Archives

New York State Library

New York State Museum

Office of Higher Education

Office of the Professions

P-12 Education

USDA Nondiscrimination Statement

In accordance with federal civil rights law and USDA civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its agencies, offices, employees, and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident.

Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the state or local agency that administers the program or contact USDA through the Telecommunications Relay Service at 711 (voice and TTY). Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other than English.

To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at How to File a Program Discrimination Complaint and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by:

Mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Mail Stop 9410, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410;

Fax: (202) 690-7442; or

Email: program.intake@usda.gov.

USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.

Diversity & Access | Public Records (FOIL) | Accessibility | Public Records (FOIL) | Internet Privacy Policy | Disclaimer

Top
