Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 13: SNAP Eligibility and Benefit Amount

PM 13-01-00: Determining SNAP Eligibility

PM 13-01-08: Excess Shelter Deduction

PM 13-01-08-b: The Utility Allowance

WAG 13-01-08-b

Allow the SNAP household one of the following utility standards.

The Air Conditioning/Heating Standard if:

billed for electricity that is for air conditioning or heat, or billed for heat that is not electric; or

all utilities are included in the rent, but the SNAP household is billed for excess heat or excess electricity that is for air conditioning or heat; or

a Qualifying Member in the SNAP household receives or has received a LIHEAP payment of $21 or more during the month of application or in any of the last 12 months. The SNAP household qualifies for this standard even if an expense for utilities is not incurred

Note: Air conditioning is central air conditioning or a window air conditioner.

The Limited Utility Standard, if billed for at least 2 utilities. The expense may not be for heat or air conditioning. It may include a telephone expense.

The Single Utility Standard, if billed for a single utility expense that is not for a telephone, air conditioning, or heat.

The Telephone Standard, if billed only for a telephone, including cell phone. The expense must be for basic phone service.

The utilities may be any of the following:electricity, cooking fuel, water and/or sewerage, garbage, basic phone service (including cell phone), well installation and maintenance, septic tank installation and maintenance, a fee for starting utility service, a flat amount for utilities.

When two or more SNAP households live together and share utility expenses, use the appropriate utility standard for each SNAP household. It is no longer a requirement that the same standard be used. Allow each household the appropriate full standard, even if the SNAP households share the cost of the same utility. A SNAP household that pays a flat amount for utilities must specify what utility expenses are incurred to allow the appropriate standard.

Do not allow shelter expenses that are paid by a vendor payment or that are reimbursed to the household and excluded as income.

SNAP Households with LIHEAP

SNAP households that contain Qualifying Members (See PM 05-06-02) that receive Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) of $21 or more are eligible for the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard.

SNAP households that do not contain Qualifying Members (See PM 05-06-02) that receive Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) of $21 or more will no longer be eligible for the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard based solely on receiving LIHEAP benefits.

Effective 09/26/2025, all active SNAP cases will be subject to the new LIHEAP eligibility criteria when a new utility expense added to the case. SNAP households without a Qualifying Member that were previously approved for the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard due to LIHEAP will continue to receive the AC/Heating Standard through their next redetermination or if a change in utility expense is reported, whichever comes first.

Air Conditioning/Heating Standard, Limited Utility Standard, Single Utility Standard, and Excess Utilities

If a SNAP household lives in rental housing and some utilities are included in the rent, but the SNAP household is billed on a regular basis by the landlord for other utilities separately from the rent, use the appropriate standard.

Example 1: A SNAP household reports that heat is included in the rent but electricity is not included in the rent. The landlord bills the customer for electricity separate from the rent. The customer has a window air conditioner. The household is eligible for the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard.

Example 2: A SNAP household reports that heat is included in the rent but the landlord bills separately for electricity and water. The household is eligible for the Limited Utility Standard.

Example 3: A SNAP household reports that heat is included in the rent but the landlord bills for electricity separate from the rent. The SNAP household does not have air conditioning. The household is eligible for the Single Utility Standard.

Example 4: A SNAP household reports that all utilities are included in the rent. During the summer the landlord charges $5 per month for air conditioning. The household is eligible for the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard, the standard is allowed year-round.

Example 5: A SNAP household reports that electricity and heat included in their rent, but are billed for excess air conditioning and heat. The household is eligible for the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard.

To allow a standard, the utility bill does not have to be in the customer's name. Allow the appropriate standard, even if the SNAP household is billed less often than monthly.

A SNAP household that receives an energy assistance payment (other than LIHEAP) that is excluded as income is entitled to the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard only if the amount of the expense exceeds the amount of the assistance. When an energy assistance payment is counted as income and the SNAP household incurs a heating or cooling expense, allow the Air Conditioning/Heating Standard.

Group Home Residents

A resident of a group home does not qualify for use of the Air Conditioning/ Heating Standard, Limited Utility Standard, or the Single Utility Standard (see PM 13-01-08-b). The amount the group home states the customer pays for shelter expenses, including utilities, is a housing cost for SNAP. A resident of a group home may qualify for the Telephone Standard if they pay for their own private telephone.

Supportive Living Facility (SLF) Residents

A resident of an SLF does not qualify for use of a utility standard, except telephone. A resident of an SLF may qualify for the Telephone Standard if they pay for their own private telephone.

Multiple SNAP Households

When 2 or more SNAP households live together and qualify for a utility standard, allow each household that contributes toward the utility costs the appropriate standard. Do this regardless of the amount paid or whether or not they all receive SNAP benefits.

When separate SNAP households live apart and share utilities, allow the appropriate standard to each SNAP households that is sharing the expense.

Utility deposits are not an allowable utility expense.

When 2 or more households live together and share the telephone expense, allow each household the Telephone Standard. See WAG 13-01-08-b for the Telephone Standard amount.

Illinois Hardest Hit Fund (HHF)

The HHF assistance (loan) is excluded from income as meeting the definition of a loan. The SNAP household is also allowed a shelter deduction as the mortgage is a continuing charge for the shelter occupied by the household (see PM 08-04-04-o).

SNAP Homeless Households

A homeless SNAP household that receives the Homeless Shelter Standard does not qualify for the excess shelter deduction (PM 13-01-08) or a utility allowance.

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
