Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

Customers

Providers

About

News

Contact

IDHS

About IDHS

Publications

Manuals

Family & Community Services Manuals

Cash, SNAP, and Medical Manual

Policy Manual Chapter Table of Contents

PM 13: SNAP Eligibility and Benefit Amount

PM 13-01-00: Determining SNAP Eligibility

PM 13-01-07: Child Support Income Exclusion

WAG 13-01-07.

Child Support Income Exclusion

All court-ordered child support payments are treated as an income exclusion from the SNAP household's total gross monthly income when comparing to the Maximum Monthly Gross Income Standard for the household size. It is not allowed as an income deduction in the net benefit calculation.

If eligible, the household's countable income (after the exclusion) is used in the benefit calculation. The same procedure applies for expedited service and the benefits calculation

The amount of monthly child support payments may be excluded from the SNAP household's gross monthly income when child support is required by a support order and payments are being made. Include payments for:

child support payments required by a support order; and

past due amounts; and

payments for other expenses, such as health insurance or rent, if required by a support order.

Payments must be made to, for, or on behalf of a person who is not a SNAP unit member. Do not allow alimony or spousal support payments, or voluntary child support payments.

At initial application, REDE and when a change is reported, actual support payments made in the last 30 days is used to determine the child support income exclusion and is converted to a monthly amount. See PM 13-02-04 Converting Income and Deductions to a Monthly Amount.

Illinois Department of Human Services
JB Pritzker, Governor · Dulce M. Quintero, Secretary

IDHS Office Locator

IDHS Help Line

1-800-843-6154

1-866-324-5553 TTY

State of Illinois

Accessibility

Privacy

Report Abuse/Neglect

Contact

Outlook Login
